Title: Infinite-state Games with Energy Objectives Beyond Counters

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.05935v2

Published Time: Tue, 12 May 2026 03:21:55 GMT

Number of Pages: 43

Markdown Content:
# Infinite-state games with energy objectives beyond counters 

# Irmak Sağlam #

Max Planck Institute for Software Systems (MPI-SWS), Germany 

# Georg Zetzsche #

Max Planck Institute for Software Systems (MPI-SWS), Germany 

Abstract 

In the theory of games on infinite-state arenas, there is a stark contrast between (i) recursion-based models such as pushdown systems and extensions on one hand, and (ii) counter-based models like vector addition systems with states (VASS) on the other. For pushdown systems and extensions, there is a rich variety of decidable and well-understood games, whereas on VASS arenas, even extremely simple games are undecidable. Here, a VASS is an automaton with counters that can be incremented and decremented, but not tested for zero. Crucially, the counters can only assume non-negative values. However, certain VASS games become decidable when using energy semantics: An energy game is played on a system with counters, but the arena includes configurations with negative counters. The requirement that the counters stay non-negative is, instead, part of the winning condition of the existential player. We study an analogue of energy semantics—legality of instructions as part of the winning condition rather than arena—on a broad class of infinite-state systems, where we call them viability games. Specifically, we study viability games in the framework of valence systems over graph monoids, where (undirected, loops allowed) graphs specify various infinite-state systems, such as pushdowns, VASS counters, integer counters, and combinations thereof. In our main results, we provide a complete description of the decidability and complexity landscape of viability games across valence systems over graph monoids. Our results reveal encouraging decidability properties. For example, in certain combinations of pushdowns and counters, viability games are decidable, despite non-termination games being undecidable there. Moreover, viability games are even decidable for certain systems where (single-player) control-state reachability is undecidable. 

2012 ACM Subject Classification Theory of computation → Problems, reductions and completeness; Theory of computation → Concurrency; Theory of computation → Formal languages and automata theory 

Keywords and phrases Games on Graphs, Decidability, Complexity, Energy Games, Vector addition systems, Pushdown, Groups, Valence Systems 

Funding Funded by the European Union (ERC, FINABIS, 101077902). Views and opinions expressed 

are however those of the author(s) only and do not necessarily reflect those of the European Union or the European Research Council Executive Agency. Neither the European Union nor the granting authority can be held responsible for them. 

> arXiv:2605.05935v2 [cs.FL] 11 May 2026

I. Sağlam, G. Zetzsche 1

# 1 Introduction 

Games on finite-state arenas are a cornerstone of formal methods. This is due to (i) their applications to reactive synthesis, where the task is to automatically construct a finite-state system to specification, but also (ii) a wealth of algorithmic methods for analyzing games. The situation is much more dire for infinite-state arenas. This is unfortunate, because software systems are typically represented using infinitely many states. Indeed, games on infinite-state arenas are usually only decidable for specialized classes of infinite-state systems: While for pushdown systems (and recursion-based extensions like higher-order pushdown automata or higher-order recursion schemes), a rich variety of games is decidable [17, Ch. 12], using counter-based systems like vector addition systems as arenas will almost always lead to undecidability [17, Ch. 13]. 

Vector addition systems For example, (d-dimensional) vector addition systems ( d-VASS) 

are systems with access to d counters—ranging over the natural numbers—which can be incremented and decremented, but not tested for zero. VASS are a pillar of verification and infinite-state research, because of their ability to model concurrent systems. Unfortunately, with VASS configuration graphs as arenas, almost all games are unde-cidable. For example, games where the objective is to (i) reach a particular control-state (or configuration), or even just to (ii) sustain an infinite run, are both undecidable, already in dimension two [17, Thm. 13.1]. In fact, it is a well-known phenomenon that branching time logics are usually undecidable for VASS (e.g. see [15, Section 6] for a severely restricted branching logic; and see [16, Section 5] for more results), implying undecidability for many other kinds of games on VASS. 

Energy games However, there is a “VASS-like” game that is decidable: Energy games. Here, the configurations consist of a control-state and counters that can be incremented and decremented. There are two players, the existential player ( ∃), and the universal player ( ∀). Here, ∃ has the objective of just playing infinitely long, such that the counter values stay non-negative. The difference to other games on VASS is, however, that in the arena , the configurations are over the integers . The fact that the counter values stay non-negative is part of ∃’s winning condition . The game can be viewed as “VASS-like”, since ∃ has to construct a VASS run. Energy games have received a significant amount of attention, with well-understood decidability and complexity [1, 5, 8 –12, 17, 22, 31]. Thus, Energy semantics—making non-negativity part of the winning condition rather than the arena—achieves decidability. 

In search of decidable infinite-state games In the quest for decidable games for infinite-state systems, the remarkable case of energy games thus raises the question: Does energy semantics also lead to decidability in broader classes of infinite-state systems? 

Viability games To this end, we study Energy-like semantics on infinite-state systems other than VASS, and call them viability games . Here, we take a class of infinite-state systems with instructions like push, pop, increment, decrement and allow these instructions to be applied anytime. However, the winning condition of the existential player—whose goal it is to sustain an infinite run—includes that this run is confined to valid /viable configurations. Here, being valid/viable means that the configuration existed in the original system: This is precisely how energy games are related to games on VASS arenas. The term “viability” expresses that the existential player has to maintain a more general viability condition rather than specifically keeping energy levels non-negative. 2 Infinite-state games with energy objectives beyond counters 

Valence systems over graph monoids We formalize viability games in the general framework of valence systems over graph monoids [36]. These systems consist of a finite-state automaton with access to an infinite-state storage mechanism, which is decribed by a finite undirected graph Γ. For example, if Γ consists of isolated vertices without self-loops, then valence systems over Γ are pushdown automata. If Γ is a clique of d vertices (without self-loops), then this realizes a d-dimensional VASS. Adding self-loops would yield a d-dimensional integer VASS. The framework can also realize combinations such as (i) pushdown VASS [19, 23], which feature both a pushdown and VASS counters or (ii) pushdowns of counters [34, 35, 37], where each stack entry contains a valuation of a set of counters. Valence systems over graph monoids have been studied with respect to various algorithmic problems, such as reachability problems [18, 37, 38], decidable underapproximations [29, 32], finite-state abstractions [3, 6, 35], logics on configuration graphs [14] and even games played on configuration graphs, in Muskalla’s dissertation [30, Ch. 19]. Unfortunately, the results on games echo the abovementioned situation on pushdowns and VASS: Essentially, games with a control-state or configuration reachability objective are decidable for valence systems over Γ precisely when Γ realizes a pushdown [30, Thms. 19.2.1&19.2.10]. 

Main results Our main results provide a full description of the decidability and complexity landscape of viability games across valence systems over graph monoids. Specifically, we study the problem of determining the winner of a viability game in two variants, inherited from energy games: In the fixed initial credit setting, the initial storage content is given; in the unknown initial credit setting, the task is to decide whether there exists a storage content (i.e. counter valuation, stack content, etc.) from which the existential player wins. Moreover, we consider these problems in the general setting where graph Γ is drawn from a class G of graphs (that is closed under taking induced subgraphs). This captures settings where aspects of the storage mechanism are part of the input. For example, if G is the class of unlooped cliques of size ≤ d, then viability games over G correspond to d-dimensional energy games. If G contains all unlooped cliques, then viability games over G are energy games over arbitrary dimension (and the dimension is part of the input). Our results show that for every choice of G, the above problems are either (i) P-complete, (ii) coNP -complete, (iii) EXP -complete, (iv) 2EXP -complete, or (v) undecidable. 

Viability semantics achieves decidability Viability games are indeed decidable for a relat-ively broad class of systems. Among valence systems, viability games are decidable essentially for two kinds of systems: VASS (i.e. energy games) and what we denote as PD (Grp ). The latter are an extension of pushdown systems where each stack entry carries an element from some infinite group G. With the instructions, one can push and pop letters, but also multiply elements of G onto the top-most group element on the stack. Here, pushing creates a fresh entry initialized to 1 ∈ G. Popping is only possible if the top-most group element equals the neutral 1 ∈ G. Thus, the invalid instructions (to be avoided by the existential player) are pops with (i) a mismatching stack letter or (ii) the top-most group element being ̸ = 1 .As an example, if G is the group Zd for some d ≥ 1, then we call these systems PD (Z-VASS ),because one has a stack whose entries carry integer vectors that can be incremented and decremented, as in Z-VASS [20]. One can thus regard this as stacks of Z-VASS configurations .Decidability of viability games for PD (Grp ) is noteworthy for two reasons. First, in the classic setting (i.e. arenas of valid configurations) even the special case of PD (Z-VASS ) is as unfavorable to games as VASS: even non-termination games are undecidable (see Section B.2) , already for d = 2 . Second, in PD (Grp ) overall (i.e. beyond the groups Zd), even ordinary (single-player) control-state reachability is undecidable. Thus, even though it is undecidable whether a valid pop will ever be executed, we can still decide viability games over PD (Grp ).I. Sağlam, G. Zetzsche 3

Related work Energy games have received a significant amount of attention in recent decades [1, 5, 8 –12, 17, 22, 31]. They are equivalent to Z-reachability games [5, 8], B-VASS games [31] and can also be viewed as alternating VASS [12]. As observed by Abdulla, Mayr, Sangnier, and Sprosten [2], instead of viewing energy games as VASS games with a modified semantics, one can equivalently view them as VASS games with the restriction of being one-sided , meaning the universal player cannot modify the counters. In the same way, viability games correspond to one-sided games over valence system arenas. Another combination of energy games with infinite-state systems beyond counters has been studied in [1]. Their approach is to add counters to existing infinite-state systems (i.e. pushdown and one-counter systems) and apply energy semantics only to the extra counters: They show that (i) pushdown games with one energy dimension and (ii) one-counter games with two extra energy dimensions are undecidable, whereas one-counter games with one energy dimension are decidable. In our work, in contrast, the energy/viability semantics applies to the entire system. However, we observe that their undecidable “pushdown energy games” (i.e. pushdown systems with extra counters) reduce to pushdown VASS games under viability semantics (see Section F.1). 

Outline In Section 2, we provide a self-contained description of the two types of infinite-state systems for which our results yield decidability. After this, we start with preliminaries in Section 3 and define viability games in Section 4. In Section 5, we state our two main results (Main Theorems A and B) and discuss implications. Then Section 6 gives an overview of the proof and of novel ingredients. In Sections 7–10 we then sketch our proofs. Remaining proof details are in the appendix. 

# 2 The two decidable cases 

Within the framework of viability games over valence systems, our main results identify two types of systems where these games are decidable. Since the entire framework is somewhat involved, we are using this section to describe these two system types independently of the framework. 

Model I: Vector addition systems with states The first type of system is that of VASS. A 

(d-dimensional) vector addition system with states (VASS) is a pair (Q, δ, q init ) consisting of a finite set Q of states and a finite set δ ⊆ Q × Zd × Q of transitions , and a final state 

qinit ∈ Q. A (valid) configuration 1 is a pair in Q × Nd. A transition t = ( p, u, q ) ∈ δ is 

valid in a configuration (p, x) if u + x ∈ Nd, in which case the resulting configuration is 

(q, x + u), and we write (p, x) t

−→ (q, x + u). A sequence w = t1 · · · tm of transitions is 

valid in a configuration (p, x) if there are configurations (q0, x0), . . . , (qm, xm) such that 

(p, x) = ( q0, x0) and (qi, xi) ti

−→ (qi+1 , xi+1 ). In this case, we write (p, x) w

−→ (qm, xm).

Finitely generated groups The second type of system is an extension of pushdown systems, where in between letters, one can store elements of a group. In the framework of valence systems, this group is always a graph group (also called right-angled Artin group), but in fact, our decidability proof applies to any finitely generated group with a decidable word problem.    

> 1The reason we call these valid configurations is that in valence systems that correspond to VASS, we will have a more liberal notion of configurations (i.e. there are things called configurations that are not valid VASS configurations. However, to keep terminology simple in this section, we also just use the term configuration.

4 Infinite-state games with energy objectives beyond counters 

(Moreover, the EXP complexity bound holds as soon as the word problem of the group is solvable in EXP ). Since this more general setting is also easier to describe, we choose it here. We begin with some terminology. A group is a set G together with an associative binary operation · : G×G → G such that (i) there is a neutral element 1 ∈ G, i.e. g ·1 = 1 ·g = g, and (ii) every element g ∈ G has an inverse g−1 ∈ G such that g · g−1 = g−1 · g = 1 . For a subset 

S ⊆ G and a sequence w ∈ S∗ over elements of S, we write [w] ∈ G for the group element obtained by multiplying the elements in w. A generating set of G is a subset S ⊆ G such that every element of G can be written as a product of elements in S or in S−1 : = {s−1 | s ∈ S}.The group G is finitely generated if it has a finite generating set. If S is a finite generating set of G, then the word problem is the following decision problem: Given a string w ∈ (S ∪ S−1)∗,decide whether [w] = 1 . It is well-known that decidability (or complexity, up to logspace reductions) of the word problem does not depend on the chosen generating set [26, p. 88]. 

Model II: Group pushdown systems From now on, we fix a finitely generated group G,with a finite generating set W . A G-pushdown system is a tuple P = ( Q, Σ, δ, q init ), where Q

is a finite set of states , Σ is its stack alphabet ,

δ ⊆ Q × (Σ ∪ ¯Σ ∪ G) × Q

is its finite set of transitions , and qinit ∈ Q is its initial state . Here, edges labeled Σ are 

push-transitions , i.e. an edge (p, a, q ) with a ∈ Σ pushes an a on the stack. Edges labeled 

¯Σ = {¯a | a ∈ Σ} are pop-transitions , i.e. an edge (p, ¯a, q ) will pop an a from the stack. Formally, the elements of G on edges of P are specified by words over W ∪ W −1, which is possible since W is a generating set of G.A (valid) configuration of P is a pair (p, u ), where p ∈ Q and u is a sequence g0a1g1 · · · amgm,where g0, . . . , g m ∈ G are group elements, and a1, . . . , a m ∈ Σ are stack letters. In such a configuration, a transition t = ( p, x, q ) is valid if 

a. x ∈ Σ. In this case, t is called a push transition and the resulting configuration is 

(q, g 0a1g1 · · · amgmx1) .

b. x ∈ ¯Σ, say x = ¯a, and am = a and gm = 1 . In this case, t is called a pop transition , and the resulting configuration is (q, g 0a1g1 · · · am−1gm−1).

c. x ∈ G. In this case, t is called a group transition and the resulting configuration is 

(q, g 0a1g1 · · · am(gmx)) . In other words, x is multiplied onto the top-most group element. In these cases, we write (p, u ) t

−→ (q, v ), where (q, v ) is the resulting configuration. As above, we define (p, u ) w

−→ (q, v ) to mean that (q, v ) can be reached via a sequence w of valid transitions. In this case, the sequence w is called valid in (p, u ).

Viability games Let us now describe viability games on VASS and group pushdown systems. Such a game is played by two players, the existential ( ∃) and the universal player ( ∀), and is specified by a VASS (resp. a group pushdown system), so that the set Q of states is partitioned as Q = Q∃ ∪ Q∀, where Q∃ belongs to the existential player, and Q∀ belongs to the universal player. During a play, the two players choose transitions. Here, the chosen transition must always respect the current state. Moreover, the current state determines which player can choose the next transition. The key idea is that the winning condition of the existential player requires (i) the play to be infinite and (ii) all prefixes of the transition sequence to be valid in the initial configuration. In the fixed initial credit setting, the initial configuration is the empty configuration: (qinit , 0)

for VASS and (qinit , ε ) for group pushdown systems (here, ε is the empty sequence). In the 

unknown initial credit setting, we are asked whether there exists an initial configuration from which the existential player wins. I. Sağlam, G. Zetzsche 5

q0 q1 q2 q3

q4

q5  

> (0 ,1)

¯a 

> (−1,0)

a ¯a                

> (1 ,0)
> Figure 1 A viability game on the G-pushdown system P, where G=Z×Z. Circle states belong to the existential player and square states to the universal player. Push transitions are labeled with stack letters ( a), pop transitions with their barred counterparts ( ¯a), and group transitions with elements of G. Unlabeled edges carry the neutral element (0 ,0) ∈Z×Z, i.e. they leave the top group element unchanged.

Viability games on VASS and energy games Crucially, observe that viability games on (d-dimensional) VASS are equivalent to ( d-dimensional) energy games. 

Example: Viability game on a Z × Z-pushdown system Consider a G-pushdown system 

P = ( Q, Σ, δ, q init ), where Q = {q0, . . . , q 5}, Σ = {a}, qinit = q0 and G = Z × Z is the group with componentwise addition and neutral element (0 , 0) , generated by W =

{(1 , 0) , (−1, 0) , (0 , 1) , (0 , −1) }. The game is depicted in Fig. 1, where circle states belong to the existential player ( Q∃) and square states to the universal player ( Q∀). In the fixed initial credit setting, the existential player does not win this game, as she cannot win from the initial configuration (qinit , ε ). In the unknown initial credit setting, however, she does win. Specifically, she wins from any initial configuration of the form 

(qinit , u · a(0 , −1)) , where u = g0ag 1 · · · ag m for g0, . . . , g m ∈ Z × Z, i.e. any configuration with at least one a and the topmost group element (0 , −1) . To see why the top of the stack must be a(0 , −1) : in order to sustain an infinite play, the existential player must eventually reach q2, which requires applying the group transition (0 , 1) followed by the pop transition 

¯a. For the pop transition to be valid, the topmost stack entry must be (0 , −1) , followed by the letter a, so that after the group transition (0 , 1) the topmost group element becomes 

(0 , 0) = 1 (the neutral element of G), as required for a valid pop, so the a can be popped. Once the existential player reaches q2 with stack content u, she wins by the following strategy. From q2, the universal player may take the self-loop any number of times m ∈ N

(each time pushing an a with group element (0 , 0) , leaving the stack as ua m) before moving to q3. From q3, the existential player moves to either q4 or q5, depending on which transition the universal player took to q3, with the stack content ua m. In all cases, the existential player can navigate back to q2 with stack content u, by popping the m copies of a using the self-loop on q5. Since the same strategy applies from q2 with any stack content, this produces an infinite sequence of valid transitions, and the existential player wins. It follows from our results (see Section 5) that viability games are decidable (and, even in 

EXP ) for Z × Z-pushdown systems—in both the fixed and unknown initial credit settings (in fact, the decidability proof even applies to any group with a decidable word problem). However, perhaps surprisingly, if we replace one of the Z-counters with a VASS counter (i.e. one that must be non-negative in valid configurations), viability games become undecidable. 

# 3 Preliminaries 

Graphs In the general framework of valence systems over graph monoids, the storage mechanism of an infinite-state system is specified by an undirected graph that may have 6 Infinite-state games with energy objectives beyond counters 

self-loops. Formally, a graph is a pair Γ = ( V, E ), where V is its set of vertices and 

E ⊆ { S ⊆ V | | S| ≤ 2} is its set of edges . Nodes a, b ∈ V are adjacent if {a, b } ∈ E. Here, a singleton {a} in E is a self-loop (on a), so we say that a is looped . A clique is a set of pairwise adjacent vertices. In an independent set , all vertices are pairwise non-adjacent. An induced subgraph of Γ is a graph (V ′, E ′), where V ′ ⊆ V and also E′ = {S ∈ E | S ⊆ V ′}, i.e. among its vertices, Γ′ has precisely those edges that appear in Γ. If there is no danger of confusion, we also call a graph ∆ induced subgraph of Γ if ∆ is isomorphic to an induced subgraph of Γ.

The congruence relation To define the storage mechanism described by a graph Γ, we need to introduce the congruence ≡Γ. To Γ = ( V, E ), we associate the alphabet Σ = V ∪ ¯V ,where we regard V as an alphabet and ¯V = {¯a | a ∈ V } as a decorated version of V . We also define the involution ¯· : Σ∗ → Σ∗, where a 7 → ¯a and ¯a 7 → a and w = a1 · · · an 7 → ¯an · · · ¯a1.On Σ∗, the set of words over Σ, we consider the smallest congruence ≡Γ that satisfies: 

a¯a ≡Γ ε for each a ∈ Vxy ≡Γ yx for each {a, b } ∈ E, x ∈ { a, ¯a}, y ∈ { b, ¯b}.

Here, a = b is allowed, meaning if a is looped, then ¯aa ≡Γ a¯a ≡Γ ε. The congruence gives rise to a monoid , which is a set M together with an associative operation and a neutral element 1 ∈ M . Specifially, we have the monoid MΓ := Σ ∗/ ≡Γ. For a word w ∈ Σ∗, we use 

[w] to denote the congruence class of w.

Monoids as storage mechanisms Traditionally, the monoid MΓ is used to define “valence automata (over MΓ)” that accept languages. Here, each edge carries an input word and a word over Σ, where words w ∈ Σ∗ are viewed as (sequences of) storage instructions. Then a run with instructions w1, . . . , w n on its edges is accepting if [w1 · · · wn] = 1 . Intuitively, this is because such a sequence w1 · · · wn has neutral effect: A pushdown automaton accepts if the instruction sequence brings the empty stack back to the empty stack (or equivalently, brings any possible stack back to itself); a VASS accepts if the instruction sequence brings the empty counters back to the empty counters (equivalently, brings any counters valuation back to itself). Note that this way, elements [w] can be viewed both as configurations (i.e. the one reached by applying w) and as actions: applying [w] to [u] yields [w][ u] = [ wu ].

Examples With suitable Γ, one can now realize classical storage mechanisms like pushdowns or counters. For example, if Γ has no edges (not even self-loops), valence automata over Γ

are essentially pushdown automata with stack alphabet V . A word w ∈ Σ∗ = ( V ∪ ¯V )∗ has 

[w] = 1 if and only if w can be brought to the empty word by deleting factors a¯a. Viewing 

V as push instructions and ¯V as pop instructions, this is equivalent to w being a sequence of instructions that bring the empty stack back to the empty stack. Let Γ be an unlooped clique , i.e. a clique without self-loops. Then w ∈ Σ∗ = ( V ∪ ¯V )∗ has 

[w] = 1 if and only if, for each a ∈ V , every prefix u of the projection of w to just {a, ¯a}, has the property |u|a ≥ | u|¯a, and also |w|a = |w|¯a. Thus, [w] = 1 if and only if w is a sequence of increment ( a) and decrement ( ¯a) operations that bring all counters from zero to zero, while maintaining non-negativity. Thus valence automata over Γ are d-VASS for d = |V |.If Γ is a looped clique , i.e. a clique of looped vertices, then w ∈ Σ∗ has [w] = 1 if and only if |w|a = |w|¯a for each a ∈ V , and MΓ ∼= Zd for d = |V |. Hence valence automata over looped cliques are Z-VASS [20]: counter machines with integer-valued counters. Finally, suppose P3 is the graph , i.e. the path on three vertices. The two outer vertices alone behave like a pushdown as above. The middle vertex is adjacent to both pushdown vertices, and in itself, behaves like a 1-VASS. Thus, a valence automaton I. Sağlam, G. Zetzsche 7

over Γ is a pushdown automaton with access to one additional VASS counter, also known as one-dimensional pushdown VASS [4, 19]. 

Viable runs and right-invertibility In the setting of viability games, we do not need a notion of accepting run, but we need a notion of a run that is “allowed” (or “viable”), i.e. does not perform any illegal instructions. Given that a sequence w ∈ Σ∗ is considered complete in valence automata if [w] = 1 , we can define w (or [w]) as valid or viable if w can be completed to 1, i.e. if the element [w] is right-invertible in M . Here, an element x ∈ M is called right-invertible if there is y ∈ M with xy = 1 . The set of right-invertible elements of M is denoted R(M ). Thus, we call an instruction (sequence) v ∈ (V ∪ ¯V )∗ valid (resp. 

invalid ) in a configuration [u] if [uv ] ∈ R (MΓ) (resp. [uv ] /∈ R (MΓ)). The idea to consider right-invertible elements as valid configurations/instruction sequences has been introduced in work on first-order logic with reachability over configuration graphs of valence systems [14]. As observed there, for those concrete storage mechanisms (such as pushdowns or VASS counters) that can be represented by Γ, R(MΓ) corresponds to real configurations. For example, if Γ has no edges and thus represents a pushdown, then R(MΓ)

is the set of all [w] with w ∈ V ∗, which corresponds to the set of stack words over V , hence 

R(MΓ) ∼= V ∗. On the other hand, stack words containing a pop not preceded by a push of the same letter, e.g. [ ¯a] or [b¯a] where a̸ = b, are not valid configurations. Clearly, they are not right-invertible in MΓ, and thus not in R(MΓ). If Γ is a loopless clique, then R(MΓ) is also the set of all [w] with w ∈ V ∗, but since [ab ] = [ ba ] for a, b ∈ V , we have an isomorphism 

R(MΓ) ∼= Nd for d = |V |. Hence, R(MΓ) is the set of valid counter valuations in a d-VASS. Once more, for a, b ∈ V , [ ¯a] and [b¯a] for a̸ = b are not in R(MΓ) as those are not valid configurations. 

Valence system Let Γ be a graph. A valence system over Γ is a tuple (Γ , Q, δ, q init ), where 

Γ = ( V, E ) is a graph, Q is a finite set of states , δ ⊆ Q × (V ∪ ¯V )∗ × Q is the transition relation , and qinit ∈ Q is its initial state . A configuration is a pair (q, x ) ∈ Q × MΓ. We denote the set of all configurations with Conf . A run is a (finite or infinite) sequence of configurations (q0, x 0)( q1, x 1) . . . ∈ Conf ∗ ∪ Conf ω such that for each i, there is a transition 

(qi, w, q i+1 ) in δ such that xi+1 = xiyi, where yi = [ w]. Thus, after applying transitions 

w1, . . . , w n, we arrive in some (q, x ) with x = [ w1] · · · [wn] = [ w1 · · · wn].

# 4 Viability games 

We now introduce viability games and the corresponding decision problems. As mentioned above, viability games generalize Energy games by including “invalid configurations” in the arena (i.e. the results of instructions that are not allowed), and making it part of the winning condition of ∃ to only use valid/viable configurations. This leads to our notion of arenas: 

Valence game arena A (valence) game arena is a valence system (Γ , Q = Q∃ ⊔ Q∀, δ, q init )

where the set of states Q are parititoned into two sets Q∃, the states owned by the existential (or, ∃-) player and Q∀, the states owned by the universal (or, ∀-) player. Moreover, in a game arena, every state has at least one outgoing transition, and for any p, q ∈ Q, there is at most one transition from p to q. Thus, each graph Γ defines a class of valence games arenas, in the same way it defines a class of valence systems. A play is an infinite run. A valence game (G, Obj ), is a game arena G with an objective 

Obj ⊆ Conf ω . Intuitively, ∃-player controls Q∃ and tries to satify Obj , while ∀-player controls 

Q∀ and tries to violate Obj . For ι ∈ {∃ , ∀} , we denote {∃ , ∀} \ { ι} by 1 − ι. An ι-strategy 

is a map σι : Q∗Qι → Q such that for every σι(wq ) = q′, there is a (q, x, q ′) ∈ δ. A play 8 Infinite-state games with energy objectives beyond counters 

(q1, x 1)( q2, x 2) . . . is compliant with σι if for every i with qi ∈ Qι, we have σι(q1 . . . q i) = qi+1 .Note that starting from an initial configuration (q, x ), any state sequence q1q2 . . . with q1 = q

and similarly, any two strategies σ∃ and σ∀, define a unique play because there is at most one transition between any two states. An ι-strategy σι is winning from a configuration 

(q, x ) if all plays starting from (q, x ) and compliant with σι are in Obj if ι = ∃, and not in 

Obj if ι = ∀. A configuration (q, x ) is won by the player that has a winning strategy from 

(q, x ). If the objective is a Borel set, each configuration is won by one of the players [28]. 

▶ Remark 4.1. The assumption that every state has an outgoing transition is non-essential for the objectives we consider, but simplifies the definitions. See Section A.1 for details. 

Graph classes A single graph Γ represents a specific storage mechanism, such as 2-VASS if Γ is . Thus, understanding a decision problem for each individual Γ tells us little about the setting where part of the storage mechanism (such as the dimension of a VASS) is given in the input. Therefore, we consider the more general setting where the graph Γ is also part of the input, but drawn from some class G. For example, if Γ is the class of unlooped cliques, then this captures the setting of VASS where the dimension is arbitrary and part of the input. We will assume that G is closed under taking induced subgraphs. 

Viability games We are ready to define viability games. Here, the fact that only valid/viable configurations should be used is part of the objective for ∃-player. Consider a valence game arena (Γ , Q = Q∃ ⊔ Q∀, δ, q init ). We define the objective RIO ⊆ Conf ω , short for “right-invertibility objective”, as the set of plays (q1, x 1)( q2, x 2) . . . where xi ∈ R (MΓ) for every 

i ∈ N. In other words, the play only visits valid/viable configurations. RIO is a Borel set. 

Decision problems We have the following decision problems related to viability games. In the fixed initial credit setting, the initial configuration (or, credit ) [w] is given. For a class G

of graphs, FV (G) is the following problem: 

Given: A graph Γ = ( V, E ) from G, a valence game arena over Γ, and a word w ∈ (V ∪ ¯V )∗.

Question: Does ∃-player win (qinit , [w]) for the objective RIO ?We also have the unknown initial credit setting, where the initial configuration is to be determined. For a class G of graphs, UV (G) is the following problem: 

Given: A graph Γ = ( V, E ) from G and a valence game arena over Γ.

Question: Is there a w ∈ (V ∪ ¯V )∗ such that ∃-player wins (qinit , [w]) for the objective RIO ?

# 5 Main results 

In this section, we present the main results of this work. Main Theorem A provides a full characterization of decidability and complexity of FV , and Main Theorem B provides such a characterization of UV . We begin with some notation needed in the statements. 

The VASS dimension Intuitively, the VASS dimension of G is the largest dimension of VASS that can be simulated using storage mechanisms over G. A d-clique is a clique of 

d ∈ N vertices. Recall that an (un)looped d-clique represents d-dim. Z-VASS ( d-dim. VASS). Therefore, we denote by Z-VASS (resp. VASS ) the class of looped (resp. unlooped) cliques. For a class G of graphs, we define its VASS dimension Vdim (G) as the supremum over all d

such that some graph in G contains an unlooped d-clique as an induced subgraph. 

Stacks of configurations For some graphs Γ, valence systems over Γ behave like pushdown systems where the stack entries can be configurations of other storage mechanisms. Suppose a graph Γ = ( W ∪ U, E ) is obtained from a graph ∆ = ( W, E ) by adding a set U of unlooped independent (i.e. pairwise non-adjacent) vertices. Then the elements of R(MΓ) can be I. Sağlam, G. Zetzsche 9

written as [wr+1 ur wr · · · u1w1], where u1, . . . , u r ∈ U and [w1], . . . , [wr+1 ] ∈ R (M∆). This can be viewed as a stack content with letters u1, . . . , u r , interspersed with configurations 

[w1], . . . , [wr+1 ] corresponding to ∆. Then, multiplying some w ∈ (W ∪ ¯W )∗ will yield 

[wr+1 ur wr · · · u1w1w], i.e. apply w to the top-most entry. Multiplying some u ∈ U will yield 

[wr+1 ur wr · · · u1w1u] and thus start a fresh entry on top. Finally, applying ¯u will yield a right-invertible element (i.e. be valid/viable) if and only if u = u1 (i.e. we are popping the right letter) and [w1] = 1 (the top-most entry is empty). If that is the case, then this yields 

[wr+1 ur wr · · · u1w1 ¯u] = [ wr+1 ur wr · · · u2w2], thus popping the entire top-most entry. For these reasons, we denote by PD (G) the class of graphs Γ as above, where ∆ is drawn from G: We think of these as pushdown systems over G. Formally, PD (G) is the class of graphs Γ = ( W ∪ U, E ) where U is a set of unlooped independent vertices, and (W, E ) ∈ G .We also write PD for all graphs that are just unlooped independent graphs, i.e. (U, ∅).

Direct products Suppose Γ is obtained from ∆1 and ∆2 by taking a disjoint union of the vertices, and making any two vertices v1 from ∆1 and v2 from ∆2 adjacent. Then 

MΓ ∼= M∆1 × M∆2 and thus valence systems over Γ can be viewed as having access to both 

storage mechanisms ∆1 and ∆2, used independently. We therefore write Γ = ∆ 1 × ∆2, and extend this notation to classes of graphs, i.e. G1 × G 2. For example, PD × VASS are the graphs corresponding to pushdown vector addition systems [4, 19, 23]. 

Groups If Γ has only looped vertices, then MΓ is a group , meaning for every x ∈ MΓ, there is a y ∈ MΓ with xy = 1 : Indeed, for w ∈ (V ∪ ¯V )∗, we have [w ¯w] = 1 , since ¯aa ≡Γ a¯a ≡Γ ε

for any a ∈ V . Therefore, we denote by Grp the class of graphs with only looped vertices. Note that for a class G, an algorithm for FV (G × Grp ) or UV (G × Grp ) can just ignore all letters in the Grp components, since they never stand in the way of right-invertibility. 

The main results We are now ready to state our main results. We first have a full description of the decidability and complexity landscape of the fixed initial credit setting: 

▶ Main Theorem A. Let G be a class of graphs closed under induced subgraphs. 

a. If Vdim (G) < ∞ and G ⊆ VASS × Grp , then FV (G) is P-complete. 

b. If Vdim (G) < ∞ and G ⊆ PD (Grp ) × Grp ∪ VASS × Grp , but G̸ ⊆ VASS × Grp , then FV (G)

is EXP -complete. 

c. If Vdim (G) = ∞ and G ⊆ PD (Grp ) × Grp ∪ VASS × Grp , then FV (G) is 2EXP -complete. 

d. In all other cases, FV (G) is undecidable. 

Likewise, we have a full description of the decidability and complexity landscape of the unknown initial credit setting: 

▶ Main Theorem B. Let G be a class of graphs closed under induced subgraphs. 

a. If Vdim (G) < ∞ and G ⊆ VASS × Grp , then UV (G) is P-complete. 

b. If Vdim (G) = ∞ and G ⊆ VASS × Grp , then UV (G) is coNP -complete. 

c. If G ⊆ PD (Grp ) × Grp ∪ VASS × Grp , but G̸ ⊆ VASS × Grp , then UV (G) is EXP -complete. 

d. In all other cases, UV (G) is undecidable. 

Let us briefly interpret Main Theorems A and B in terms of concrete storage mechanisms. First, note that G ⊆ VASS ×Grp means that G corresponds to VASS (up to a group component, which does not affect the game). Then, Vdim (G) < ∞ means the VASS dimension is bounded by some fixed d ∈ N, while Vdim (G) = ∞ means G corresponds to VASS of arbitrary dimension. Moreover, graphs in PD (Grp ) correspond to group pushdown systems (see Section 2) where the group is a graph group. Thus, in both theorems, case (a) corresponds to fixed-dimensional VASS. In Main Theorem A, case (b) means we allow group pushdowns or fixed-dimensional VASS, and 10 Infinite-state games with energy objectives beyond counters 

case (c) is the same as (b), except that the VASS have arbitrary dimension. In Main Theorem B, case (b) corresponds to arbitrary VASS, whereas case (c) means we have some group pushdown system, and VASS of either fixed or arbitrary dimension. 

Discussion: Decidability through viability semantics Our results show that fixed and unknown initial credit problems are decidable precisely for a class G included in PD (Grp ) ×

Grp ∪ VASS × Grp . Since a direct product with Grp is irrelevant for FV and UV , this means the interesting settings are PD (Grp ) and VASS .Here, FV (VASS ) and UV (VASS ) are the same as multi-dimensional energy games, meaning our results reveal PD (Grp ) as a new class of systems with decidable games. This new class PD (Grp ) includes PD (Z-VASS ), i.e. stacks where entries contain vectors over Zd, for some d ∈ N. These are part of the class of stacked counter automata [35, 37]. Having a decidable game type for PD (Z-VASS ) is noteworthy, because these systems behave as unfavorably to classical games as VASS : In games where the arena ensures validity of instructions, (i) control-state reachability games, (ii) configuration reachability games, and (iii) non-termination games (where the objective is just to construct an arbitrary infinite run), are all undecidable for PD (Z-VASS ). For (i),(ii), this was shown in [30, Thms. 19.2.1,19.2.10]. For (iii), we provide a simple proof in Section B.2. Therefore, in PD (Grp ), we identify a new class of systems where the viability semantics achieves decidability. Decidability of viability games for PD (Grp ) is noteworthy for another reason: In PD (Grp )

(beyond PD (Z-VASS )), even ordinary (i.e. single-player) control-state reachability is undecid-able. This is because the rational subset membership problem for graph groups (which is undecidable in general [25, Theorem 2]) reduces to control-state reachability in PD (Grp ).

Discussion: Subtle decidability border Let us briefly discuss the subtle decidability border for FV and UV for graphs of the form PD ( ), i.e. a stack of two counters, which are either 

Z-VASS counters or VASS counters. If both are VASS counters, then viability games are undecidable by a similar reduction as for ordinary safety games for 2-VASS. It turns out, the construction can be adapted if one counter is a Z counter, i.e. for PD ( ). However, if both are Z counters, then we are in PD (Grp ), where viability games are decidable. 

# 6 Proof overview and key ingredients 

In this section, we give an overview of the proofs of Main Theorems A and B. The individual ingredients will be shown in the subsequent sections.          

> (i) (ii) (iii) (iv)
> Figure 2 Illegal graphs. Dotted edges indicate that both versions (with or without the edge) are illegal. For each graph, we name the vertices a,band cfrom left-to-right.

Undecidable cases Let us begin by mentioning those graphs for which we show undecid-ability (both of FV and UV ). We call the graphs shown in Fig. 2 the illegal graphs . Note that in Fig. 2, a dotted edge means it can be present or not (and both variants are deemed illegal). We will show that for these graphs, both FV and UV are undecidable: 

▶ Theorem 6.1. If Γ is an illegal graph, then both FV (Γ) and UV (Γ) are undecidable. I. Sağlam, G. Zetzsche 11 

Pure VASS-like cases As apparent from Main Theorems A and B, the decidable cases are those where every graph in G belongs to PD (Grp ) × Grp or to VASS × Grp (or both). Since in our setting, a direct product with a group will have no influence on the game (as right-invertibility is not affected), we may as well assume that the graphs belongs to 

PD (Grp ) ∪ VASS . For graphs in VASS , the problems FV and UV are just energy games with unary-encoded numbers, and thus complexity follows from existing results: 

▶ Theorem 6.2. Let G ⊆ VASS × Grp . If Vdim (G) = ∞, then FV (G) is 2EXP -complete and 

UV (G) is coNP -complete. If Vdim (G) < ∞, then both FV (G) and UV (G) are P-complete. 

It is immediate from the definitions that the case Vdim (G) = ∞ corresponds to energy games where the dimension is arbitrary (and part of the input). Here, the fixed initial credit setting FV is 2EXP -complete [22, Cor. 6.1] and the unknown initial credit setting UV is 

coNP -complete [9, Thm. 9]. Moreover, Vdim (G) < ∞ is the case of fixed dimension. Here, both settings are P-complete, see [22, Thms. 3.3&3.5]. 

Pure Pushdown-like cases Now suppose G ⊆ PD (Grp ) × Grp , or equivalently G ⊆ PD (Grp ).Here we discover a novel decidability result: While control-state reachability games and configuration reachability games (and even ordinary control-state reachability, without games!) are undecidable, viability games are decidable for PD (Grp ) storage mechanisms. Moreover, we will show that both FV and UV are EXP -complete for this class: 

▶ Theorem 6.3. Suppose G ⊆ PD (Grp ) × Grp . Then FV (G) and UV (G) are in EXP . EXP -hardness holds as soon as G contains a graph that does not belong to VASS × Grp .

Regarding hardness, note that a graph in PD (Grp ) × Grp belongs to VASS × Grp if and only if it contains at most one unlooped vertex v, and all the unlooped vertices are adjacent to v.Thus, Γ does not belong to VASS × Grp if and only if Γ contains (i) two unlooped vertices or (ii) one unlooped vertex v and a looped vertex u that is not adjacent to v. In both cases, one can reduce classic pushdown (non-termination) games to FV (Γ) and UV (Γ) which is known to be EXP -hard [33]. The interesting part of Thm. 6.3 is the decidability and EXP upper bound of FV and UV .These will be shown in Sections 7 and 8. 

Completeness of the characterization In addition to Thms. 6.1–6.3, we also need to show that every class G of graphs falls into one of the cases in Main Theorems A and B. This will follow from the following, which we prove in Section 10: 

▶ Theorem 6.4. Every graph that contains no illegal graph as an induced subgraph belongs to PD (Grp ) × Grp ∪ VASS × Grp .

Key technical ingredients Our proofs contain several novel technical ingredients. First, proving undecidability in the case of (i) (Fig. 2) requires a subtle encoding of two-counter machine: Valence systems over (i) have a pushdown, where each entry contains one N-counter and one Z-counter. Note that such an undecidability proof is not possible if both are 

Z-counters, as then we are in the PD (Z-VASS ) setting, which is decidable. Second, our algorithm for FV (PD (Grp )) relies on the insight that if the stack contains a group element that does not have a representation among polynomial length words, then 

∀ can force a victory, because these elements are “too big to cancel in time”. This implies that detecting winning strategies can be confined to group elements with representations of polynomial length ℓ. However, a naive implementation of this would encode the group elements in an exponential-sized stack alphabet (resulting in a 2EXP algorithm). Indeed, we 12 Infinite-state games with energy objectives beyond counters 

cannot store the group elements as words on the stack: After expanding them (potentially beyond length ℓ), we need to find a new representation of length ≤ ℓ (if one exists), but this requires substantial rewriting far from the ends of the word. To mitigate this, we devise an algorithm that, as in pure pushdown systems [7], saturates only sets of (sets of) control states. This yields the optimal EXP algorithm. Third, our algorithm for UV (PD (Grp )) reduces to FV (PD (Grp )) . To this end, a com-binatorial argument shows that initial configurations of exponential stack height (and polynomial-sized group-valued entries) always suffice. However, an additional trick is needed to allow ∃ to guess an exponential-sized stack without having the opportunity to grow it infinitely. We achieve this by adapting a recent technique from indexed languages [27]. Fourth, a combinatorial argument shows that all graphs that avoid the illegal graphs (Fig. 2) belong to VASS × Grp or to PD (Grp ) × Grp .Note that in the literature on valence systems, complete descriptions of decidability (let alone complexity) landscapes are rare. For decidability, this has been achieved for first-order logic with reachability [14], certain underapproximations of reachability that are designed to guarantee decidability [29, 32], and games on valence system arenas [30] (but here, only trivial cases are decidable). 

# 7 Group pushdowns with fixed initial credit 

In this section, we show that FV (PD (Grp ) × Grp ) can be solved in EXP . Since in a group, every element is right-invertible, this problem trivially reduces to FV (PD (Grp )) .

Group elements on the stack However, the group elements on the stack do pose a non-trivial challenge. Indeed, recall that if Γ ∈ PD (Grp ), then an element in R(MΓ) is of the form [wr+1 γr wr · · · γ1w1], where γ1, . . . , γ r are from an independent, unlooped set of vertices (i.e. pushdown letters), and w1, . . . , w r+1 are over looped vertices (i.e. generators of a group). Now, if we perform a pop of γ in this configuration, then it depends on the top-most group element [w1] (and γ1) whether this leads to a valid configuration: If [w1] = 1 and γ1 = γ,then this will lead to the right-invertible [wr+1 γr wr · · · γ1w1], but if [w1]̸ = 1 or γ̸ = γ1, then the result is not right-invertible. Since viability games for pushdown systems can easily be reduced via classical safety games on pushdown systems, the (infinitely many) group elements on the stack constitute the main difficulty. 

Preparation: single pushdown letter We may assume that the initial credit λ is empty, since this can easily be encoded in the arena. We may also assume that there is only a single pushdown letter (aside from group elements): If there are pushdown letters {γ1, . . . , γ k} and looped vertices W , then each entry γiw with w ∈ (W ∪ ¯W )∗ in a configuration is encoded by 

γg iγw , where γ is a single fresh pushdown letter, and g is an arbitrary letter in W . Thus, we encode one entry by two entries, the first of which encodes the specific original letter γi

used. This works because for g ∈ W , the elements gi for i ∈ N are pairwise distinct. 

▶ Lemma 7.1. FV (PD (Grp )) reduces in poly-time to the case of a single unlooped vertex. 

Details are in Section D. Thus we assume Γ = ( V, E ), with V = {γ}∪ W , where γ is unlooped, the vertices in W are all looped, and there are no edges between γ and W . Clearly, we may assume that all transitions carry either a letter in V ∪ ¯V or ε.

Strategy trees Winning strategies for ∃ describe infinite runs, meaning it is not immediate how to represent them finitely. In contrast, winning strategies for ∀ have finite representations: Since a play winning for ∀ must visit an invalid configuration (i.e. (q, [u]) with [u] /∈ R (MΓ)), I. Sağlam, G. Zetzsche 13 

and everything thereafter is irrelevant, we can represent the strategy in a finite tree. Therefore, our algorithm searches for a winning strategy for ∀.Specifically, a ι-strategy tree for ι ∈ {∃ , ∀} is a tree with nodes in Q × MΓ, edges are labeled by V ∪ ¯V ∪ { ε}, such that the following holds: If a node (q, [u]) has q ∈ Q1−ι, then for every transition q v

−→ q′ in δ, the node (q, [u]) has a child (q′, [uv ]) . If q ∈ Qι, then the node has a single child (q′, [uv ]) for some transition q v

−→ q′ in δ. Here, the edges are always labeled by the multiplied v. We call the tree winning if all branches (i.e. plays) are winning for 

ι-player. For ∀-strategy trees this means each branch visits some (q, [u]) with [u] /∈ R (MΓ).We consider finite winning ∀-strategy trees where every branch has the first such (q, [u]) as a leaf. Our task is thus to detect winning ∀-strategy trees. 

Saturating along stack height If we had no group elements, then detecting ∀-strategy trees would amount to solving a safety game on a pushdown graph. Here, a standard approach is a saturation procedure [7]. The data that is being saturated is, for each q ∈ Q, the set Rq

of all subsets P ⊆ Q such that, roughly speaking, there is a ∀-strategy tree with root node 

(q, [ε]) where we allow leaves that (i) are invalid (i.e. /∈ R (MΓ)), or (ii) end in an empty configuration [ε], but in P . We call such a “relaxed winning ∀-strategy tree” a P -tree . Then clearly, ∅ ∈ Rq if and only if there is a winning ∀-strategy tree rooted in (q, [ε]) .In the pushdown setting, Rq can be computed via saturation w.r.t. the maximal stack height: Let Riq be the set of all P ⊆ Q such that there is a (P, i )-tree , i.e. a P -tree where all stack heights across branches are ≤ i. Without group elements, it is not hard to compute 

Ri+1  

> q

from Riq via emptiness of finite-state tree automata. 

Main challenge: Group elements The main challenge in our algorithm is to perform the above saturation in the presence of group elements. Note that very closely related tasks are already undecidable: It is undecidable (for certain Γ) whether a given regular L ⊆ (W ∪ ¯W )∗

contains some w ∈ (W ∪ ¯W )∗ with [w] = 1 [25, Thm. 2]. Thus, it is undecidable whether, even in the single-player setting, there is ever a valid pop. 

Key idea: Big & small elements Let us sketch how we deal with group elements, in the case of stack height 0. The crucial observation is that group elements can be “big” or “small”. Intuitively, small elements just need polynomially many bits, whereas big elements are “too big to cancel in time” and thus do not need to be stored exactly. Let us make this precise. With ∆ = ( W, E ), let g ∈ M∆ be some group element. Let ∥g∥

denote the word length of g, i.e. the length of the shortest word w ∈ (W ∪ ¯W )∗ with g = [ w].We say that q ∈ Q is 0-eligible if there exists a ∀-strategy tree where (i) q is in the root and (ii) every branch contains a pop, and no push. Clearly, in any (P, 0) -tree, every ocurring state must be 0-eligible. The following observation about big elements is key: 

▶ Lemma 7.2. Suppose p is 0-eligible and g ∈ M∆ has ∥g∥ > |Q|. Then (p, wg ) is the root of some (∅, 0) -tree for every w ∈ { [ε]} ∪ { [uγ ] | u ∈ (V ∪ ¯V )∗}.

This is because there is a tree t witnessing 0-eligibility of height at most |Q|: In a tree higher than |Q|, we can cut a repeating occurrence of a state, and still obtain a witness. However, on this witness, every branch will multiply a group element of word length at most |Q|.Therefore, making (p, wg ) the root node will yield a (P, 0) -tree: In every branch, we multiply some element [v] with |v| ≤ | Q| to g, but since ∥g∥ > |Q|, we know that g[v]̸ = 1 : Otherwise we would have g = [ ¯v]. Therefore, the pop in each branch must be applied with a group element ̸ = 1 and is thus invalid—the tree is a (∅, 0) -tree. We say g ∈ M∆ is big if ∥g∥ > |Q|.

Cayley graphs By Lemma 7.2, it suffices to track small elements, i.e. those with word length ≤ | Q|, of M∆ exactly. We do this using a standard construction in group theory: The 14 Infinite-state games with energy objectives beyond counters 

Cayley graph of M∆, denoted C, is the directed graph with M∆ as its vertex set, and edges 

g x

−→ g′ for each g, g ′ ∈ M∆ and x ∈ W ∪ ¯W with g′ = g · [x]. Of course, C is infinite, but we consider a variant where all big elements are collapsed into one: We obtain the restricted Cayley graph C≤| Q| by removing all big nodes and inserting a fresh “trap vertex” ctrap : All edges that arrive in big elements in C are redirected into ctrap .We will regard C≤| Q| as an automaton with exponentially many states: Note that it can be computed in EXP : An element g ∈ M∆ can be represented by the length-lexicographically minimal word u ∈ (W ∪ ¯W )∗ with g = [ u]. Moreover, given words u, u ′ ∈ (W ∪ ¯W )∗, one can decide in poly-time whether [u] = [ u′]: This is because the groups of the form M∆, also called right-angled Artin groups , embed into matrix groups (over the reals) [13, 21], for which the word problem is in logspace [24]. One can thus find a minimal representative in EXP .

The base case With Lemma 7.2 and C≤| Q| in hand, we can now compute R0 

> q

: Given a set 

P ⊆ Q, we construct a finite (top-down) tree automaton that, roughly speaking, accepts 

(P, 0) -trees with q in their root. However, it restricts nodes to 0-eligible states, and so when in some node s, the element of M∆ becomes big, then the automaton can “declare victory” (for ∀): It accepts this node as a leaf, because Lemma 7.2 tells us that this node can be completed to even a (∅, 0) -tree. The automaton can therefore use C≤| Q| to track the group element on the current branch. This tree automaton has exponentially many states, and it accepts some tree if and only if P ∈ R0 

> q

. Thus, we can compute all of R0 

> q

in EXP .

Saturation step Once we have computed Riq for every q ∈ Q, we compute Ri+1  

> q

with similar ideas. Consider a (P, i + 1) -tree with some push of γ in some node ν in state q′ that moves the stack height from 0 to 1. In each branch below this push, we either (i) eventually come back to stack height 0 and arrive in some state p ∈ Q, or (ii) encounter an invalid pop. Let s

be the subtree consisting of all paths until (i) or (ii) occurs. Then the set P ′ of all states 

p as above, satisfies P ′ ∈ Riq′ . We can therefore “shortcut” s: Instead of performing the 

γ push, we take one subtree for each p ∈ P ′ and place it directly under ν. Repeating this shortcutting will lead to a tree with stack height 0, but with special nodes whose children are given by some P ′ ∈ Riq′ for some q′. The trees of this form can now be detected by a finite tree automaton: It is constructed as in the base case, except that each P ′ ∈ Riq′ provides a new transition to simulate shortcuts. Here, we use a fact analogous to Lemma 7.2: Note that there the bound will still be |Q|, since the automata for eligibility for higher i have exponentially many transitions, but still only |Q| states. 

Overall complexity This way, we can compute Ri+1  

> q

in EXP (w.r.t. input size) from the sets 

Riq′ for q′ ∈ Q. Since Riq ⊆ Ri+1  

> q

for every q, i , this means the overall saturation terminates in exponentially many steps, leading to an EXP upper bound overall. 

▶ Remark 7.3. A naive implementation of the idea in Lemma 7.2 would reduce FV (PD (Grp )) 

to a pushdown game with exponential stack alphabet, resulting only in a 2EXP upper bound. 

▶ Remark 7.4. Although our result is only about PD (Grp ), where the group G on the stack is of the form M∆ for a looped ∆, the algorithm even works for any finitely generated group with a decidable word problem (which asks whether a given sequence of generators yields the identity): This suffices to compute an equivalent representatives of length ≤ | Q|, if it exists. 

# 8 Group pushdowns with unknown initial credit 

In this section, we show that UV (PD (Grp )) reduces to FV (PD (Grp )) in polynomial time. Together with the EXP upper bound for FV (PD (Grp )) in Section 7, this establishes Thm. 6.3. I. Sağlam, G. Zetzsche 15 

Let Γ = ( V, E ) belong to PD (Grp ) and consider a valence game arena G. As in Lemma 7.1, we may assume that V = {γ} ∪ W such that γ is isolated and ∆ = ( W, E ) has a self-loop on every vertex. Recall that an element x ∈ R (MΓ) can be written as x = [ w] with 

w = wr+1 γw r · · · γw 1 for w1, . . . , w r+1 ∈ (W ∪ ¯W )∗. We call r = |w|γ the PD -length of w.By ∥w∥, we denote the maximal word length ∥[wi]∥ among all elements [wi] ∈ M∆.

Ingredient I: Bounding the initial credit Our first ingredient is a combinatorial argument that shows if a viability game with n states over PD (Grp ) is won with some initial credit 

λ ∈ (V ∪ ¯V )∗, then there is such a λ where with |λ|γ < 2n and ∥λ∥ ≤ n.

▶ Theorem 8.1. If the viability game UV (G) is won by ∃, then ∃ wins (qinit , [λ]) where qinit 

is the initial state of G and λ ∈ (V ∪ ¯V )∗ where |λ|γ < 2n and ∥λ∥ ≤ n.

Proof sketch. We sketch the proof for |λ|γ < 2n. The bound ∥λ∥ ≤ n uses arguments similar to Lemma 7.2. Consider a winning ∃-strategy tree τ from (qinit , [λ]) for λ = wr+1 γw r · · · γw 1

with r > 2n. We will argue that we can cut some infix γw i · · · γw j from λ.For each branch in τ , its popping depth is the maximal s such that the suffix γw s · · · γw 1

is popped during this branch. Consider the case that all branches have a popping depth 

≥ 2n. For every i ∈ [1 , 2n], let Si ⊆ Q be the (non-empty) set of all states visited on some branch after popping the suffix γw i · · · γw 1 for the first time. There must be 

j, ℓ ∈ [1 , 2n], j < ℓ , with Sj ⊇ Sℓ. But then we can remove the infix γw ℓ · · · γw j+1 from λ:By reattaching subtrees whose root contains wr+1 γw r · · · γw ℓ+1 to other nodes that used to contain wr+1 γw r · · · γw j+1 , but have the same control-state, we obtain a winning ∃-strategy tree for the shorter initial credit wr+1 γw r · · · γw ℓ+1 · γw j · · · γw 1.If there are branches with popping depth s < 2n, then for i ≤ s, they contribute to Si just as above. But for i > s , we expand Si by a state p such that this branch visits p infinitely often at its lowest stack height. Then the same cut-and-reattach procedure works. ◀

Ingredient II: Guessing the initial credit We now use Thm. 8.1 to reduce UV (PD (Grp )) to 

FV (PD (Grp )) . Here, we construct a valence game arena Gguess where ∃ first guesses an initial credit λ with |λ|γ < 2n and ∥λ∥ ≤ n, and then simulates the game. Here, the difficulty is to guess a stack content with exponentially many entries without allowing ∃ to win outright by just growing and growing the stack. To this end, we modify a construction from [27, Section 9]: The idea is to not only guess a stack with < 2n entries, but a stack with decorated letters. Then, each time ∃ pushes a pushdown letter, ∀ can check whether the stack still has < 2n entries. But in fact, ∀

checks that the decoration adheres to a pattern that implies length < 2n. This pattern is a suffix-closed set of words that can be recognized by running linearly many DFAs in parallel. Let γ[i,j ] to denote the set {γk | k ∈ [i, j ]}.

▶ Lemma 8.2. For every m ∈ N, there are m two-state DFAs (Di)i∈[1 ,m ] over γ[1 ,m ] such that ⋂ 

> i∈[1 ,m ]

L(Di) is suffix-closed and has a unique longest word of length 2m − 1.

See Fig. 4 for an illustration of Di. Intuitively, Di accepts all words where between any two 

γi’s, there is at least one occurrence of γ[1 ,i −1] . Thus, a word in the intersection can have at most one γ1, at most two γ2’s, etc. and at most 2i−1-many γi’s. Thus, the unique longest word in the intersection has length Σi∈[1 ,m ]2i−1 = 2 m − 1 and is a palindrome. 

▶ Remark 8.3. In [27, Section 9] a similar DFA-based construction in indexed/grammars/al-ternating PDAs is used to ensure a stack height of exactly 2n. Here, we need to apply this check after every push, necessitating a check of “ ≤ 2n”. Thus, our DFAs need to be suffix-closed, and hence we need a different construction than their “binary counting” DFAs. 16 Infinite-state games with energy objectives beyond counters 

pin p0 p1 · · · pn G[γ ← γ[1 ,n ]]

ch ⋂ 

> i∈[1 ,n ]

Di

γ0 Wε Wε Wε

γ[1 ,n ]

ε

ε

Figure 3 Wε stands for W ∪ ¯W ∪ { ε}. Di is the game-version of the DFA Di, depicted in Fig. 4. 

di ˜di

γ[1 ,n ] \ { γi} γ[i+1 ,n ]

γi

γ[1 ,i −1]   

> (a) Figure of Di. Both nodes are accepting.

di ˜di

γ[1 ,n ] \ { γi} γ[i+1 ,n ]

γi

γ0

γi

γ[1 ,i −1] 

γ0γ0

ε              

> (b) Figure of Di.diand ˜dicontain ( n+1)-states letting ∃read g∈M∆with ∥g∥ ≤ n.

Figure 4 The DFA Di used in Lemma 8.2, and its game version Di used in Gguess (Fig. 3). 

Constructing the game With Thm. 8.1 and Lemma 8.2, we are prepared to present the reduction. To this end, we construct the game Gguess , which is given in Fig. 3. First, ∃

collects an initial credit λ′ in the loop p0 − pn before entering G[γ ← γ[1 ,n ]]: the arena G

where every push/pop is replaced by n-many pushes/pops, one for every γi ∈ γ[1 ,n ]. Say ∃

wins the game from (qinit , λ ) for some λ = [ wr+1 γ · · · γw 1] that obeys Thm. 8.1. She collects 

λ before entering G[γi ← γ[1 ,n ]] with one caveat: she collects λ′ = [ wr+1 γr · · · γ1w1] such that the push-sequence γr · · · γ1 of λ′ is the r-length suffix of the (2 n − 1) -length word w∩

accepted by ∩[1 ,n ]L(Di). Clearly, ∃ wins (qinit , λ ) iff she wins on (G[γ ← γ[1 ,n ]] from λ′.Player ∀ can challenge the accumulated initial credit at every loop from his state ch that has an outgoing edge to the initial state of Di, ‘the game-version’ of Di, for each i ∈ [1 , n ]

(see Fig. 4(b)). Player ∀ wins the subgame Di if (i) the push-sequence of the accumulated credit is not accepted by Di, or (ii) there is a group element of word length > n inbetween two pushes. Otherwise, ∃ wins Di. As λ obeys Thm. 8.1 and the language of ∩i∈[1 ,n ]L(Di) is suffix-closed, ∃ wins the subgame ∩i∈[1 ,n ]Di entered with any prefix of λ′. As she also wins on G[γ ← γ[1 ,n ]] from λ′, she wins Gguess from (pin , [ε]) – Gguess is a positive FV instance. Suppose G is a negative UV instance, i.e. there is no initial credit with which ∃ wins on 

G[γ → γ[1 ,n ]]. Then, ∃ stays in the loop p0 − pn, and ∀ wins by waiting until the PD -length of the accumulated stack word w reaches 2n and moving to a Di for which w̸ ∈ L(Di).

# 9 Undecidability results 

We now prove Thm. 6.1, i.e. the undecidability results entailed by Main Theorems A and B. Recall that the vertices of the graphs (i)—(iv) (Fig. 2) are called a, b, c , left to right. 

▶ Theorem 9.1. Let Γ be one of the valence graphs (iii) or (iv). Then FV (Γ) and UV (Γ) 

are both undecidable. 

This follows almost directly from Abdulla, Atig, Hofman, Mayr, Kumar and Totzke [1], who show undecidability of pushdown games with a single additional counter, and where the I. Sağlam, G. Zetzsche 17 

qi q∀ 

> i,j

qj

q∃

> i,j

ε ε

ε

¯a¯b

ε

c−

b−          

> Figure 5 Reduction of (ii): zero (k)gadgets for k∈ { 1,2}. The gadgets differ only in the colored edges, where zero (1) gadget takes the pink ( ¯c) edge and zero (2) gadget takes the blue ( ¯b) edge.

objective includes non-negativity of that counter (invalid pops, however, are not visible in the arena). Moreover, valence systems over (iii) are precisely one-dimensional pushdown VASS. In the case (iv), we need a small modification, because the right-most vertex has a self-loop: We replace c (¯c) transitions with cac (¯c¯a¯c). See Section F.1 for details of both reductions. 

▶ Theorem 9.2. Let Γ be one of the valence graphs represented by (i) or (ii). Then FV (Γ) 

and UV (Γ) are both undecidable. 

The case (ii) Valence systems over (ii) belong to PD (VASS ), i.e. they have a stack whose entries are d ≥ 0 VASS counters, and (ii) is the case of d = 2 . Here, a is the pushdown letter, and b and c correspond to the counters. We exploit that a pop is only valid if the top-most entry’s counters are both zero. This permits a reduction from two-counter machines (with instructions dec (k), inc (k), zero (k), for k = 1 , 2), similar to undecidability of games on VASS arenas [17, Thm. 13.1]. We still sketch (ii), to set the stage for the new idea for (i). For (ii), we use a stack with two entries (the lower containing a single b), and the top-most entry containing the two counter values: We encode (m1, m 2) ∈ N2 by bab m1 cm2 . Increments and decrements are mimiced directly on b and c. For zero-tests, the gadget in Fig. 5 lets ∀ win if the tested counter, say b, was not zero: If ∀ challenges, then ∃ first gets a chance to reset the untested counter, say c, in q∃ 

> i,j

. Since this cannot go on forever (this would eventually lead to an illegal decrement), ∃ must move right eventually, but this is only victorious for ∃

if both counters are actually zero: Otherwise, we obtain an element bab m1 cm2 ¯a¯b with m1, m 2

not both zero, which is not right-invertible (here, the single b is there to make this element non-right-invertible even if a has a self-loop). See Section F.2 for details. 

The case (i) With (i), we need a new trick. Here, we have a pushdown where each entry contains one N-valued counter ( b) and one Z-valued counter ( c). The gadget Fig. 5 would not work, because when zero-testing b, the ¯c loop would let ∃ win just by looping ¯c.The trick is to encode (m1, m 2) ∈ N2 as bab m1+m2 cm2 . Then, in the new zero-test gadget (Fig. 6, right), when ∃ gets a chance to deplete the untested counter in q∃ 

> i,j

, each of her loops will include a decrement on b, which means (as above) she cannot do this forever. However, the encoding as bab m1+m2 cm2 does not in itself guarantee m1 ≥ 0 and m2 ≥ 0: This element can be right-invertible despite m1 < 0 or m2 < 0. Therefore, decrements also use a gadget (Fig. 6, left) where ∀ wins as soon as m1 < 0 or m2 < 0. See Section F.3 for details. 

# 10 Completeness of characterization 

In this section, we prove Thm. 6.4. 18 Infinite-state games with energy objectives beyond counters 

qi q∀ 

> i,j

qj

q∃

> i,j

¯b¯c

¯b

ε

ε

¯a¯b

ε¯b

¯b¯c

qi q∀ 

> i,j

qj

q∃

> i,j

ε ε

ε

¯a¯b

ε

¯b¯c

¯b             

> Figure 6 Reduction of (i): dec (k)(left) and zero (k)(right) gadgets for k∈ { 1,2}. Gadgets differ only in the colored edges, where k= 1 and 2gadgets take pink (down) and blue (up) edges, resp.

Proof of Thm. 6.4. Suppose Γ contains no illegal graph as an induced subgraph. Let U be the set of unlooped vertices of Γ. If U is empty, then Γ even belongs to Grp , and thus to the union as desired. Hence, we assume U̸ = ∅. We distinguish two cases, illustrated in Fig. 7. First, suppose U contains two adjacent vertices a̸ = b. Then every other vertex in V must be adjacent to both a and b, as otherwise, Γ would contain one of the illegal graphs (ii), (iii), or (iv). This means, the vertices in U form an unlooped clique, and all looped vertices are adjacent to all vertices in U . Thus, Γ belongs to VASS × Grp .Now suppose the vertices in U are independent. We partition the looped vertices of Γ

into the sets X and Y , where (i) X contains those looped vertices that are adjacent to some vertex in U and (ii) Y contains all other looped vertices. 

L

U

> VASS ×Grp

U X Y   

> PD (Grp )×Grp
> Figure 7 Any Γwithout an illegal graph as induced subgraph is in one of these two classes.

Claim 1: All vertices in X are adjacent to all vertices in U . Indeed, otherwise there is an 

x ∈ X not adjacent to some u ∈ U . However, x is adjacent to some u′ ∈ U by definition of 

X, and so u, u ′, x induce an illegal graph (i). This establishes Claim 1. 

Claim 2: All vertices in X are adjacent to all vertices in Y . Indeed, otherwise there are non-adjacent x ∈ X and y ∈ Y . But since there is u ∈ U , the vertices y, u, x together induce an illegal graph (i). This establishes Claim 2. Clearly, the graph induced by U ∪ Y belongs to PD (Grp ). By our claims, the vertices in 

X are adjacent to all vertices in U ∪ Y , hence the entire Γ belongs to PD (Grp ) × Grp . ◀

References    

> 1Parosh Aziz Abdulla, Mohamed Faouzi Atig, Piotr Hofman, Richard Mayr, K. Narayan Kumar, and Patrick Totzke. Infinite-state energy games. In Thomas A. Henzinger and Dale Miller, editors, Joint Meeting of the Twenty-Third EACSL Annual Conference on Computer Science Logic (CSL) and the Twenty-Ninth Annual ACM/IEEE Symposium on Logic in Computer Science (LICS), CSL-LICS ’14, Vienna, Austria, July 14 - 18, 2014 , pages 7:1–7:10. ACM, 2014. doi:10.1145/2603088.2603100 .

I. Sağlam, G. Zetzsche 19 

2 Parosh Aziz Abdulla, Richard Mayr, Arnaud Sangnier, and Jeremy Sproston. Solving parity games on integer vectors. In Pedro R. D’Argenio and Hernán C. Melgratti, editors, CONCUR 2013 - Concurrency Theory - 24th International Conference, CONCUR 2013, Buenos Aires, Argentina, August 27-30, 2013. Proceedings , volume 8052 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science ,pages 106–120. Springer, 2013. doi:10.1007/978-3-642-40184-8_9 .

3 Ashwani Anand, Sylvain Schmitz, Lia Schütze, and Georg Zetzsche. Verifying unboundedness via amalgamation. In Pawel Sobocinski, Ugo Dal Lago, and Javier Esparza, editors, Proceedings of the 39th Annual ACM/IEEE Symposium on Logic in Computer Science, LICS 2024, Tallinn, Estonia, July 8-11, 2024 , pages 4:1–4:15. ACM, 2024. doi:10.1145/3661814.3662133 .

4 Clotilde Bizière and Wojciech Czerwinski. Reachability in one-dimensional pushdown vector addition systems is decidable. In Michal Koucký and Nikhil Bansal, editors, Proceedings of the 57th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, STOC 2025, Prague, Czechia, June 23-27, 2025 , pages 1851–1862. ACM, 2025. doi:10.1145/3717823.3718149 .

5 Tomás Brázdil, Petr Jancar, and Antonín Kucera. Reachability games on extended vec-tor addition systems with states. In Samson Abramsky, Cyril Gavoille, Claude Kirchner, Friedhelm Meyer auf der Heide, and Paul G. Spirakis, editors, Automata, Languages and Programming, 37th International Colloquium, ICALP 2010, Bordeaux, France, July 6-10, 2010, Proceedings, Part II , volume 6199 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science , pages 478–489. Springer, 2010. doi:10.1007/978-3-642-14162-1_40 .

6 P. Buckheister and Georg Zetzsche. Semilinearity and context-freeness of languages accepted by valence automata. In Krishnendu Chatterjee and Jirí Sgall, editors, Mathematical Foundations of Computer Science 2013 - 38th International Symposium, MFCS 2013, Klosterneuburg, Austria, August 26-30, 2013. Proceedings , Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 231–242. Springer, 2013. doi:10.1007/978-3-642-40313-2_22 .

7 Thierry Cachat. Symbolic strategy synthesis for games on pushdown graphs. In Peter Widmayer, Francisco Triguero Ruiz, Rafael Morales Bueno, Matthew Hennessy, Stephan J. Eidenbenz, and Ricardo Conejo, editors, Automata, Languages and Programming, 29th International Colloquium, ICALP 2002, Malaga, Spain, July 8-13, 2002, Proceedings , volume 2380 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science , pages 704–715. Springer, 2002. doi:10.1007/3-540-45465-9_60 .

8 Jakub Chaloupka. Z-reachability problem for games on 2-dimensional vector addition systems with states is in P. Fundam. Informaticae , 123(1):15–42, 2013. doi:10.3233/FI-2013-798 .

9 Krishnendu Chatterjee, Laurent Doyen, Thomas A. Henzinger, and Jean-François Raskin. Generalized mean-payoff and energy games. In Kamal Lodaya and Meena Mahajan, editors, 

IARCS Annual Conference on Foundations of Software Technology and Theoretical Computer Science, FSTTCS 2010, December 15-18, 2010, Chennai, India , volume 8 of LIPIcs , pages 505–516. Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2010. doi:10.4230/LIPICS. FSTTCS.2010.505 .

10 Krishnendu Chatterjee, Mickael Randour, and Jean-François Raskin. Strategy synthesis for multi-dimensional quantitative objectives. In Maciej Koutny and Irek Ulidowski, editors, 

CONCUR 2012 - Concurrency Theory - 23rd International Conference, CONCUR 2012, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK, September 4-7, 2012. Proceedings , volume 7454 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science , pages 115–131. Springer, 2012. doi:10.1007/978-3-642-32940-1_10 .

11 Thomas Colcombet, Marcin Jurdzinski, Ranko Lazic, and Sylvain Schmitz. Perfect half space games. In 32nd Annual ACM/IEEE Symposium on Logic in Computer Science, LICS 2017, Reykjavik, Iceland, June 20-23, 2017 , pages 1–11. IEEE Computer Society, 2017. 

doi:10.1109/LICS.2017.8005105 .

12 Jean-Baptiste Courtois and Sylvain Schmitz. Alternating vector addition systems with states. In Erzsébet Csuhaj-Varjú, Martin Dietzfelbinger, and Zoltán Ésik, editors, Mathematical Foundations of Computer Science 2014 - 39th International Symposium, MFCS 2014, Budapest, Hungary, August 25-29, 2014. Proceedings, Part I , volume 8634 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science , pages 220–231. Springer, 2014. doi:10.1007/978-3-662-44522-8_19 .20 Infinite-state games with energy objectives beyond counters 

13 Michael W. Davis and Tadeusz Januszkiewicz. Right-angled artin groups are commensurable with right-angled coxeter groups. Journal of Pure and Applied Algebra , 153(3):229–235, 2000. 

doi:10.1016/S0022-4049(99)00175-9 .

14 Emanuele D’Osualdo, Roland Meyer, and Georg Zetzsche. First-order logic with reachability for infinite-state systems. In Martin Grohe, Eric Koskinen, and Natarajan Shankar, editors, 

Proceedings of the 31st Annual ACM/IEEE Symposium on Logic in Computer Science, LICS ’16, New York, NY, USA, July 5-8, 2016 , pages 457–466. ACM, 2016. doi:10.1145/2933575. 2934552 .

15 Javier Esparza. On the decidability of model checking for several μ-calculi and Petri nets. In Colloquium on Trees in Algebra and Programming , pages 115–129. Springer, 1994. doi: 10.1007/BFb0017477 .

16 Javier Esparza and Mogens Nielsen. Decidability issues for petri nets – a survey, 2024. 

arXiv:2411.01592 , doi:10.48550/arXiv.2411.01592 .

17 Nathanaël Fijalkow, C. Aiswarya, Guy Avni, Nathalie Bertrand, Patricia Bouyer, Romain Bren-guier, Arnaud Carayol, Antonio Casares, John Fearnley, Paul Gastin, Hugo Gimbert, Thomas A. Henzinger, Florian Horn, Rasmus Ibsen-Jensen, Nicolas Markey, Benjamin Monmege, Petr Novotný, Pierre Ohlmann, Mickael Randour, Ocan Sankur, Sylvain Schmitz, Olivier Serre, Mateusz Skomra, Nathalie Sznajder, and Pierre Vandenhove. Games on graphs: From logic and automata to algorithms, 2025. arXiv:2305.10546 , doi:10.48550/arXiv.2305.10546 .

18 Moses Ganardi, Rupak Majumdar, and Georg Zetzsche. The complexity of bidirected reachab-ility in valence systems. In Christel Baier and Dana Fisman, editors, LICS ’22: 37th Annual ACM/IEEE Symposium on Logic in Computer Science, Haifa, Israel, August 2 - 5, 2022 ,pages 26:1–26:15. ACM, 2022. doi:10.1145/3531130.3533345 .

19 Roland Guttenberg, Eren Keskin, and Roland Meyer. PVASS reachability is decidable. CoRR ,abs/2504.05015, 2025. arXiv:2504.05015 , doi:10.48550/ARXIV.2504.05015 .

20 Christoph Haase and Simon Halfon. Integer vector addition systems with states. In Joël Ouaknine, Igor Potapov, and James Worrell, editors, Reachability Problems - 8th International Workshop, RP 2014, Oxford, UK, September 22-24, 2014. Proceedings , volume 8762 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science , pages 112–124. Springer, 2014. doi:10.1007/978-3-319-11439-2_ 9.

21 Tim Hsu and Daniel T Wise. On linear and residual properties of graph products. Michigan Mathematical Journal , 46(2):251–259, 1999. doi:10.1307/mmj/1030132408 .

22 Marcin Jurdzinski, Ranko Lazic, and Sylvain Schmitz. Fixed-dimensional energy games are in pseudo-polynomial time. In Magnús M. Halldórsson, Kazuo Iwama, Naoki Kobayashi, and Bettina Speckmann, editors, Automata, Languages, and Programming - 42nd International Colloquium, ICALP 2015, Kyoto, Japan, July 6-10, 2015, Proceedings, Part II , volume 9135 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science , pages 260–272. Springer, 2015. doi:10.1007/ 978-3-662-47666-6_21 .

23 Jérôme Leroux, Grégoire Sutre, and Patrick Totzke. On the coverability problem for pushdown vector addition systems in one dimension. In Magnús M. Halldórsson, Kazuo Iwama, Naoki Kobayashi, and Bettina Speckmann, editors, Automata, Languages, and Programming -42nd International Colloquium, ICALP 2015, Kyoto, Japan, July 6-10, 2015, Proceedings, Part II , volume 9135 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science , pages 324–336. Springer, 2015. 

doi:10.1007/978-3-662-47666-6_26 .

24 Richard J. Lipton and Yechezkel Zalcstein. Word problems solvable in logspace. Journal of the ACM , 24(3):522–526, July 1977. doi:10.1145/322017.322031 .

25 Markus Lohrey and Benjamin Steinberg. The submonoid and rational subset membership prob-lems for graph groups. Journal of Algebra , 320(2):728–755, 2008. doi:10.1016/j.jalgebra. 2007.08.025 .

26 Roger C. Lyndon and Paul E. Schupp. Combinatorial Group Theory . Springer Berlin, Heidelberg, 1977. doi:10.1007/978-3-642-61896-3 .I. Sağlam, G. Zetzsche 21 

27 Richard Mandel, Corto Mascle, and Georg Zetzsche. The complexity of downward closures of indexed languages, 2026. arXiv:2601.19466 , doi:10.48550/arXiv.2601.19466 .

28 Donald A. Martin. Borel determinacy. Annals of Mathematics , 102(2):363–371, 1975. doi: 10.2307/1971035 .

29 Roland Meyer, Sebastian Muskalla, and Georg Zetzsche. Bounded context switching for valence systems. In Sven Schewe and Lijun Zhang, editors, 29th International Conference on Concurrency Theory, CONCUR 2018, Beijing, China, September 4-7, 2018 , volume 118 of LIPIcs , pages 12:1–12:18. Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2018. 

doi:10.4230/LIPICS.CONCUR.2018.12 .

30 Sebastian Muskalla. Certificates for automata in a hostile environment . PhD thesis, 2023. 

doi:10.24355/dbbs.084-202401201643-0 .

31 Jean-François Raskin, Mathias Samuelides, and Laurent Van Begin. Games for counting abstractions. In Michael Huth, editor, Proceedings of the Fouth International Workshop on Automated Verification of Critical Systems, AVoCS 2004, London, UK, September 4, 2004 ,volume 128 of Electronic Notes in Theoretical Computer Science , pages 69–85. Elsevier, 2004. 

doi:10.1016/J.ENTCS.2005.04.005 .

32 Aneesh K. Shetty, S. Krishna, and Georg Zetzsche. Scope-bounded reachability in valence systems. In Serge Haddad and Daniele Varacca, editors, 32nd International Conference on Concurrency Theory, CONCUR 2021, Virtual Conference, August 24-27, 2021 , volume 203 of LIPIcs , pages 29:1–29:19. Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2021. 

doi:10.4230/LIPICS.CONCUR.2021.29 .

33 Igor Walukiewicz. Pushdown processes: Games and model-checking. Inf. Comput. , 164(2):234– 263, 2001. doi:10.1006/INCO.2000.2894 .

34 Georg Zetzsche. Silent transitions in automata with storage. In Fedor V. Fomin, Rusins Freivalds, Marta Z. Kwiatkowska, and David Peleg, editors, Automata, Languages, and Programming - 40th International Colloquium, ICALP 2013, Riga, Latvia, July 8-12, 2013, Proceedings, Part II , volume 7966 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science , pages 434–445. Springer, 2013. doi:10.1007/978-3-642-39212-2_39 .

35 Georg Zetzsche. Computing downward closures for stacked counter automata. In Ernst W. Mayr and Nicolas Ollinger, editors, 32nd International Symposium on Theoretical Aspects of Computer Science, STACS 2015, Garching, Germany, March 4-7, 2015 , volume 30 of 

LIPIcs , pages 743–756. Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2015. doi:10. 4230/LIPICS.STACS.2015.743 .

36 Georg Zetzsche. Monoids as Storage Mechanisms . PhD thesis, Technische Universität Kaiser-slautern, 2016. URL: https://kluedo.ub.rptu.de/frontdoor/index/index/docId/4400 .

37 Georg Zetzsche. The emptiness problem for valence automata over graph monoids. Inf. Comput. , 277:104583, 2021. doi:10.1016/J.IC.2020.104583 .

38 Georg Zetzsche. Recent advances on reachability problems for valence systems (invited talk). In Paul C. Bell, Patrick Totzke, and Igor Potapov, editors, Reachability Problems -15th International Conference, RP 2021, Liverpool, UK, October 25-27, 2021, Proceedings ,volume 13035 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science , pages 52–65. Springer, 2021. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-89716-1_4 .22 Infinite-state games with energy objectives beyond counters 

# A Additional material for Section 3 A.1 About dead ends in game arenas 

One could also define valence game arenas where dead ends—i.e. states with no outgoing transitions— are allowed. In this case, one would define a play that ends in a dead end as winning for the universal player. It is not difficult to see that for viability games, this more general setting reduces to the dead-end-free setting for every graph Γ:

a. If Γ has an unlooped vertex a, we can just add to every dead-end q a self-loop q ¯a

−→ q.Then, reaching a dead-end means the rest of the play consists of this transition, which will eventually reach a non-right-invertible element. 

b. If Γ has only looped vertices, then MΓ is a group and every element of MΓ is right-invertible. In this case, the game is won by the existential player if and only if they have a strategy to avoid dead-ends. It is thus a simple safety game, which can be decided in polynomial time. 

# B Additional material for Section 5 B.1 Non-termination games 

Here, we give a brief definition of non-termination games. These are games played on configuration graphs of infinite-state, where the objective of the existential player is to play infinitely long. The purpose of introducing these games is to highlight their decidability properties in contrast to viability games. Therefore, crucially, the arena only consists of valid configurations of the underlying infinite-state systems. In valence systems, valid configurations are those that are right-invertible. Therefore, a play (in a non-termination game) is a (finite or infinite) run (q1, x 1) → (q2, x 2) → · · · such that xi ∈ R (MΓ) for every i.Strategies are defined as in viability games, but notice that since runs can only visit 

R(MΓ), it can happen that a play gets stuck (and is thus maximal and finite), even if every control-state has an outgoing transition: For example, applying a decrement in a VASS may not be possible without making the counter negative. In this case, the play is won by ∀,since the objective of ∃ is to play infinitely long. 

# B.2 Non-termination games for PD (Z-VASS )

Let us now show undecidability of non-termination games for the graph in Fig. 8, which belongs to PD (Grp ), and specifically to PD ( ) ⊆ PD (Z-VASS ). Thus, valence systems over the graph in Fig. 8 are pushdown systems where the stack contains pushdown letters and between them a vector in Z2.As in the undecidability proof for non-termination games on VASS configuration graphs [17, Thm. 13.1], we reduce from the non-termination problem for deterministic two-counter machines. To simplify the construction, we assume that the two-counter machine’s counters range over Z: Since it has zero-tests available, that still leaves its non-termination game problem undecidable. We take the two-counter machine and turn operations on the counters 

i = 0 , 1 into labels bi (to increment counter i) and ¯bi (to decrement counter i). However, before starting the simulation, we first apply a, in a fresh initial state. All these states belong to ∃-player. The only non-obvious task is to simulate zero tests. In order to zero-test counter i, we use the gadget in Fig. 9: If there is a zero-test edge in the two-counter machine from state pI. Sağlam, G. Zetzsche 23 

a b0 b1   

> Figure 8 Graph in PD (Grp )with undecidable non-termination game problem

zi

+

−

di

¯bi

bi

¯bi, b1−i, ¯b1−i

bi, b1−i, ¯b1−i

¯a

¯a

¯a  

> Figure 9 Gadget for zero tests in non-termination games in PD (Z-VASS ).

to q, we use a copy of the gadget in Fig. 9 and add an edge p → zi and zi → q (indicated by the two arrows without source resp. target in Fig. 9). Note that all states in the gadget belong to ∀-player. This has the following effect. If counter i is zero-tested, then ∀ can challenge this, either by claiming counter i is in fact positive (by going to state +) or by claiming it is in fact negative (by going to −). If ∀ goes to + and counter i had indeed been positive, then ∀ can go to a configuration where both counters are zero (hence the entire storage configuration is 

a), and then use the ¯a to move to di. Since then, the ¯a loop at di is not present (since it would be invalid to pop another a), the run gets stuck in di and ∀ wins. Similarly, if the counter i had in fact been negative, ∀ can force a stuck game by going to di via −.However, if ∀’s challenge was incorrect (i.e. ∀ claimed “positive” and counter i was ≤ 0;or it guessed “negative” and counter i was ≥ 0), then going to + or − will leave the game in that respective state: Counter i will then always be negative (in +) or always be positive (in 

−), so that it is never possible to move to di. Thus, the run is stays in + or −, never gets stuck and is thus infinite. Therefore, ∃ can enfore an infinite run if and only if the (unique) run of the two-counter machines is infinite. 

▶ Remark B.1. Note that the construction does not work for viability games: There, the transitions + ¯a

−→ di and − ¯a

−→ di would always be there if the counters are not both zero, and they would mean victory for ∀. Thus, ∃ would not be able to enforce an infinite run after performing a correct zero test. In other words, this undecidability proof exploits the fact that the transitions + ¯a

−→ di

and − ¯a

−→ di are not present in the arena after a correct zero test; their absence makes ∃ win. 

▶ Remark B.2. One might wonder why there is a self-loop di

> ¯a

−→ di: after all, without it, any configuration in di would also be a dead end. However, we wanted to show that undecidability even holds if in the game, every state has an outgoing transition (like we assume for viability games). 24 Infinite-state games with energy objectives beyond counters 

# C Additional Material for Section 6 Equivalence of non-termination games on Pushdown graphs ([7, 33]) and viability games on PD graphs 

A pushdown game graph is a tuple (QP = QP 

> ∃

⊔ QP

> ∀

, ΣP, δ P) where QP is a finite set of states, where QP 

> ∃

and QP 

> ∀

are existential player and universal player states, as expected. ΣP

is a finite stack alphabet and δP ⊆ QP × ΣP × QP × (Σ P)∗ is a finite transition system. A configuration (q, w ) ∈ QP ×(Σ P)∗ consists of a state and a stack content, and (p, vγ ) → (q, vw )

for (p, γ, q, w ) ∈ δP. In other words, the transitions that give rise to non-right-invertible configurations, which are allowed in viability games, are disallowed in these games. While defining the winning condition in pushdown games, one typically ([7, 33]) lets the existential (universal) player to win every game that ends in a deadlock in a universal (existential) player state. For non-termination games, the existential player wins every infinite game. Non-termination games on a Pushdown graphs are seen to be equivalent to viability games on PD graphs ( Γ = (Σ P, ∅)) via the following reductions. To reduce a viability game to a non-termination game: Whenever there is a pop transition p ¯γ

−→ q defined on a universal state p in a viability game on PD graph, turn it into two transitions p ε

−→ p′ ¯γ

−→ q by adding a new existential state p′. This shifts the burden of the non-right-invertible transition from the universal player to the existential player, and the play is lost by the existential player in both games if the state p is reached with a stack content that does not end with γ.To reduce a non-termination game to a viability game: Do not alter the pop transitions on existential states, as the existential player cannot take them in the non-termination game (and loses if there is no other transition to take), and she avoids them in the viability game (and loses if there is no other transition to take). Whenever there is a pop transition 

p ¯γ

−→ q from a universal state p in the non-termination game, replace it with a gadget in the reduced viability game to ensure that the universal player loses in the viability game if he takes this edge with a configuation that does not end with a γ. The gadget consists of a fresh existential state p′ and the edges edge p ε

−→ p′ ¯γ

−→ q. Additionally, there are edges 

p′ ¯γi

−→ for every other pushdown letter γi ∈ ΣP \ { γ} and is a ∃-winning existential state with an ε self-loop. Intuitively, in the reduced viability game , the universal player will take the edge p ε

−→ p′ only if the top-of-the-stack is γ. Otherwise, the existential player pops the top of the stack symbol to reach and wins the game. 

# D Additional Material for Section 7 

In this section, we provide provide an EXP decision algorithm for FV (Γ) where Γ ∈ PD (Grp ),proving Thm. 6.3 for FV . A summary of the procedure is given in Section 7. Here we will provide it in a more detailed and self-contained fashion. The following is the main theorem of this section. 

▶ Theorem D.1. Let Γ ∈ PD (Grp ) × Grp . Then FV (Γ) can be decided in EXP .

We remark that we will be using the notations FV (G) and UV (G) throughout the appendix. 

▶ Remark D.2. By slight abuse of notation, we denote the instance G of the decision problems 

FV and UV as FV (G) and UV (G), respectively. That is, ∃-player wins FV (G) for an initial credit λ if and only if she wins (qinit , [λ]) in the game (G, RIO ) where qinit is the initial state of G. Similarly, ∃-player wins UV (G) if and only if there exists an initial credit λ for which she wins FV (G).I. Sağlam, G. Zetzsche 25 

Before we start presenting the EXP decision procedure, we will need some preliminaries. 

# D.1 Preliminiaries 

We start by showing that we can without loss of generality assume that the pushdown alphabet of Γ = ( V, E ) has a single letter. 

▶ Lemma 7.1. FV (PD (Grp )) reduces in poly-time to the case of a single unlooped vertex. 

Lemma 7.1. Let V = {γ1, . . . , γ m}∪ W where γi are independent vertices (i.e. the pushdown alphabet) and (W, E ) is a non-empty group graph. Let g ∈ W . We show that for any valence game arena G over Γ, there is an equivalent valence game arena G′ over Γ′ = ( {γ} ∪ W, E )

that is obtained by the following translation. Every push transition p γi

−→ q in G is turned into p γigγ i

−−−→ q in G′, and similarly, every pop transition p ¯γi

−→ q is turned into p ¯γi ¯g¯γi

−−−→ q. The translation is clearly polynomial and the equivalence is easy to verify. ◀

From now on we take V = {γ} ∪ W where γ is an indepent vertex, and ∆ = ( W, E ) is a group graph. We have seen in Section 7 that the configurations of PD (Grp ) can bew written as 

[wr+1 γw r · · · γw 1] and viewed as a stack, where wi ∈ M∆. Referring to this perspective, we will sometimes call the configurations, stack content and γ, the pushdown letter . Whenever it creates no confusion, we will further call the pushes ( γ) and pops ( ¯γ) of γ, simply pushes 

and pops . We will also refer to the removal of a suffix suf = γw i · · · γw 1 of the stack content as popping suf , and denote it with ¯suf .

▶ Observation D.3. For every game arena G, there is an equivalent polynomially larger game arena G′ where the push ( γ) transitions originate solely from universal player states. 

To obtain G′ it is sufficient to add an additional universal state r for each push transition 

(p, γ, q ) with p ∈ Q∃ in G, and replace (p, γ, q ) with the transitions (p, ε, r ) and (r, γ, q ) in G′.From now on, we will assume the push transitions originate from universal player nodes. 

Notation on trees We call a finite tree t a finite prefix subtree of a tree τ if t can be obtained from τ by removing a suffix of every branch. So every branch of t is a prefix of a branch in τ .By the height of a finite tree , we refer to the number of nodes on its longest branch. Next we introduce strategy trees. An ι-strategy tree is a tree-shaped representation of a 

ι-strategy that resolves a ι-player’s choices locally at every history. 

Strategy trees Let a game arena G = (Γ , Q = Q∃ ⊔ Q∀, δ, q init ). For ι ∈ {∃ , ∀} , an ι-strategy tree over G is a labelled tree τ rooted at a node (rt , [u]) ∈ Q × MΓ such that: The nodes of τ are configurations in Q × MΓ,The edges are labelled with V ∪ ¯V ∪ { ε},If a node (q, [u]) has q ∈ Q1−ι, then for every transition q v

−→ q′ in δ, the node (q, [u]) has a child (q′, [uv ]) and the edge is labelled with v,If a node (q, [u]) has q ∈ Qι, then the node has a single child (q′, [uv ]) where q v

−→ q′ is in 

δ and the edge is labelled with v.26 Infinite-state games with energy objectives beyond counters 

Intuitively, an ι-strategy tree τ unfolds an ι-strategy σι into a tree that assigns a unique move to each ι-node, while leaving the opponent’s choices unconstrained. Clearly, every play consistent with σι corresponds to a branch in the corresponding strategy tree. Thus, σι is winning if and only if every branch of τ is an winning play for ι in the game. Such trees are called winning ι-strategy trees. We can represent winning ∀-strategy trees via finite trees. In a winning ∀-strategy, every branch visits a node (q, [u]) where u̸ ∈ R (MΓ). We consider finite prefix subtrees of winning 

∀-strategy where each branch has its first non-right-invertible configuration as a leaf. We call these trees (finite) winning ∀-strategy trees and constrain our attention these trees. We call the label of the last edge of a finite branch, the leaf transition of the branch. Note that, all leaf transition in a (finite) winning ∀-strategy are pops ( ¯γ). Let τ be a ∀-strategy tree rooted at (q, [u]) . We denote by τ |Q the projection of τ to states Q. So τ |Q is a tree rooted at q that has states in Q as nodes instead of configurations in Q × MΓ. Similarly, for a projection tree τ rooted at q with nodes over Q, we denote by 

τ←(q, [u]) it’s extension to configurations as nodes. So, for τ ′ = τ |Q, the extension τ ′←(q, [u]) is exactly τ .

▶ Definition D.4. The stack height of a (finite or infinite) branch of a tree is the maximum number of unmatched pushes 2 a prefix of the branch contains. 

For example, the finite branch 

rt γ

−→ p1

> g−
> 1

−−→ p2

> γ

−→ p3¯γ

−→ p4

> g1

−→ p5¯γ

−→ p6

> γ

−→ p7¯γ

−→ p8

> g2

−→

has stack height 2, due to its prefix until p3 having 2 unmatched γs. We say a winning ∀-strategy (starting from some configuration (q, [u]) ) has stack height bounded by i if in the (finite) winning ∀-strategy tree it corresponds to (rooted at (q, [u]) ), every branch has stack height ≤ i.

Valid and invalid pops A pop ( ¯γ) in a play (or, branch), is called invalid if it is reached with a stack content [ε] or [wr+1 γ · · · γw 1] where w1̸ = 1 . All other pops are called valid .Further, a valid pop is called 0-valid, if it is reached with the stack content [γ].

Tree automata over a game arena We build a (top-down) tree automaton AG = ( Q ∪{q∅}, rt , Λ = ⋃

> q∈Q

(Λ q ∪ Λ+ 

> q

)) which accepts all ∀-strategy trees (restricted to states) over the game arena G rooted at rt ∈ Q – and, possibly more trees. We take rt as the root state. For each q ∈ Q∃, fix once and for all an enumeration succ (q) = ( p1, . . . , p k) of its successors and an enumeration of transition labels w1, . . . , w k leading to the successors; i.e. (q, w i, p i) ∈ δ for all i.For q ∈ Q∃ with succ (q) = ( p1, . . . , p k), we set a single transition 

Λq (q) = (( w1, p 1), . . . , (wk, p k)) , Λ+ 

> q

= ∅. (1) So, in state q, the automaton branches to all successors of q.    

> 2a push γnot neutralized by a pop ¯γ.

I. Sağlam, G. Zetzsche 27 

For q ∈ Q∀, we set Λq (q) = {(mi, p i) | (q, m i, p i) ∈ δ}. So, in state q, the automaton can nondeterministically choose one successor of q. This corresponds to the universal player’s choice at a universal node, with a given history of the game. Furthermore, the automaton can nondeterministically choose the succesors of q from the set Λ+ 

> q

which sends q to a subset of Q with ε-transitions, i.e. (ε, Q )i where i ≤ | Q|; or to ⊥ with 

∅-transition, i.e. (∅, q ∅). This additional set Λ+ 

> q

intuitively allows the universal player to pick a subset of nodes of the game as the successor of q. Here, the distinguished state q∅

led with the ∅-transition represents the case where q is mapped to the empty successor set; introducing a separate state and transition label for this case is a purely technical device that simplifies the subsequent construction. The state q∅ has no outgoing transitions. We allow AG to accept both finite and infinite trees, and assign all nodes in Q ∪ { q∅} as accepting leaf nodes for the finite case. So, AG accepts all trees rooted at rt , finite or infinite, whose branching rules comply with Λ.We can show a finite branch of a tree accepted by AG as a sequence of transitions 

rt w1

−−→ q1

> w2

−−→ · · · wl

−→ ql. Here, we call ql the leaf node and wl the leaf transition of the branch. If Λ+ 

> q

= ∅, then AG accepts exactly the ∀-strategy trees rooted at rt and their subtrees. By adding more transitions to Λ+ 

> q

, one allows short-cuts from universal player nodes to certain subset of nodes, without any change in the stack content. Whenever convenient, we give the choice of the root node as an input to AG, i.e. AG(q) is 

AG with rt = q.

# D.2 The idea behind the saturation 

Our aim in a this decision algorithm, is to figure out for each q ∈ Q, whether ∀-player has a winning strategy from (q, ε ). For this, we want to understand the set of ∀-strategy trees rooted at (q, ε ), and classify them as winning or losing. If there exists a winning ∀-strategy tree rooted at (q, ε ), we declare (q, ε ) to be winning for ∀, and if (qinit , ε ) is won by ∀,we declare the game FV (G) to be won by him. Otherwise, the game is won by ∃ due to determinacy. One of the main challanges in deciding whether a ∀-strategy tree is winning is that, in order for a pop in a branch to qualify ∀-player to win (an invalid pop) in principle, one needs to keep track of arbitrarily high stack content. This would require infinite computational power, and would not provide a decidable algorithm. To bypass this need, we will abstract the winning ∀-strategy trees by a fixpoint computation on a finite set. Each iteration of this fixpoint computation will take exponential time, and the fixpoint will be reached within exponentially many steps; providing an EXP algorithm. Here, we present these finite sets. 

P - and (P, i )-trees A P -tree is a finite prefix subtree of a ∀-strategy tree rooted at node 

(q, [w]) such that the leaf node in each branch is either (i) the first (q, [u]) for u ∈ R (MΓ) (as in the definition of a winning tree), or (ii) (q′, [ε]) for q′ ∈ P and the leaf transition is ¯γ.A P -tree is intuitively a “relaxed version” of a ∀-winning strategy tree as every branch is either won by ∀, or reaches at a node in P with empty stack – intuitively, can be won from 

P in the future. Clearly, ∀ wins the configuration (q, γ ) in G, iff there exists a ∅-tree rooted at (q, γ ).A (P, i )-tree is a P -tree in which the stack height of every branch is bounded by i.28 Infinite-state games with energy objectives beyond counters 

Then, ∀ wins the configuration (q, γ ) in G with a strategy of stack height bounded by i,iff there exists a (∅, i )-tree rooted at (q, γ ).

Saturating along stack height We will have a saturation procedure over the finite abstrac-tion sets Riq : the set of all P ⊆ Q such that there is a “relaxed ∀-strategy tree of bounded stack height i” that reaches a subset of P with empty-stack. Formally, 

Riq := {P ⊆ Q | there exists a P, i -tree τ rooted at (q, γ ).}

Clearly, ∅ ∈ Riq if and only if the universal player has a winning strategy from (q, γ ) that has stack height bounded by i. We claim that if the universal player wins (q, γ ), then there is a large enough i.

▷ Claim D.5. Universal player wins (q, γ ) if and only if there exists an i s.t. ∅ ∈ Riq .

Proof. Since the universal player wins (q, γ ), there exists a (finite) winning ∀-strategy tree τ .Let i be the maximum stack height achieved amongst the branches of τ q . Then ∅ ∈ Riq . On the other hand, if ∅ ∈ Riq then the finite tree τ that witnesses ∅ is a winning ∀-strategy tree rooted at (q, γ ). ◁

Clearly, {Riq }i∈N is a non-decreasing sequence as i tends to ∞. As the set is bounded, this sequence reaches a fixpoint. We denote this fixpoint by Rq = ⋃ 

> i∈N

Riq . By Claim D.5, we know that this fixpoint contains sufficient information to identify the nodes in Q such that (q, γ ) is ∀-winning. That is, 

▶ Lemma D.6. ∅ ∈ Rq if and only if there exists a winning ∀-strategy from (q, γ ).

Thus, we aim to construct an algorithm to saturate Riq to reach Rq .

# D.3 Calculating the saturation sets via tree automata (Part 1) 

Our idea is the obtain the sets P ∈ Riq from the leaves of trees accepted by a tree automaton. In particular, for each i, and some special element ⊤, we want to have a tree automata T iq

such that the following set calculates Riq .

{P ⊆ Q | there exists a finite tree τ accepted by T iq s.t. if p × ⊤ is a leaf of τ, then p ∈ P }

It is clear that, we want T i to accept trees that are somehow equivalent to (P, i )-trees rooted at (q, γ ).Rougly, the algorithm will proceed as follows: Recall that AG with Λ+ = ∅ accepts all 

∀-strategy trees (and all finite prefices). We will let A0 

> G

= AG and use it to accept (P, 0) -trees rooted at (q, γ ). Then for each push transition p γ

−→ q in δ and every P ∈ R0

> p

, we will add to 

A0 

> G

an ε transition from p to P using Λ+. We will therefore obtain A1 

> G

which will be used to 

(P, 1) -trees rooted at (q, γ ), and so on. As (P, 0) -trees have no pushes, we need to get rid of the trees accepted by A0 

> G

that contain pushes. Furthermore, as A0 

> G

accepts trees with game states as nodes instead of configurations, we also need to make sure that the leaves of the accepted trees indeed correspond to (i) the first non-right-invertible configuration of the branch or (ii) (q′, [ε]) with the leaf transition ¯γ.This is ensured by requiring that the leaf transitions of every branch is the first pop of the branch – and checking if the pop is valid. We use a small automaton called ‘push-pop’ automaton, to ensure that the accepted trees do not contain pushes, and the leaf transitions are the first pops of the branch: I. Sağlam, G. Zetzsche 29 

‘Push-pop’ automaton Consider a simple automaton PuPo that accepts sequences of group elements that end with a pop or an ∅-transition, i.e. {w¯γ, w ∅ | w ∈ (M∆)∗}. When taken product with A0 

> G

this automaton eliminates infinite trees, trees that contain γ, that do not contain a ¯γ as a leaf transition, and trees that contain a ¯γ anywhere else. With slight abuse of notation, we ignore the PuPo component while talking about A0 

> G

× PuPo , treating PuPo 

only as an acceptor. That is, the language of A0 

> G

× PuPo is a subset of the language of A0 

> G

.The language of A0 

> G

× PuPo is the set of all finite prefix subtrees of ∀-strategy trees that contain no pushes , and each branch has exactly one pop – that is as the leaf transition. Still, we have no idea whether these pops at the leaf transitions are valid or invalid. To understand this, we need to keep track of group elements accumulated during the branches. Once more, doing this naively would require infinite computational power, and not be decidable. Next, we explain how we tackle this problem. 

# D.4 Main challange: Group elements 

Another main challenge in our algorithm is to perform the saturation in the presence of group elements. Our crucial observation is that, we can classify the group elements as “big” or “small”. While we need to store the small elements, whenever we come across a big element, we can simply declare victory and forget about the group element. For a group element g ∈ M∆, we denote by ∥g∥ the word length of g, i.e. the length |w|

of the shortest word w ∈ (W ∪ ¯W )∗ that satisfies [g] = [ w]. Concretely, we call g “big” if 

∥g∥ > |Q| and “small” otherwise. Our crucial observation that we can “declare victory” whenever we come accross a “big” group element relies on Lemma D.7, that we will prove later. 

Eligibility A state q ∈ Q is called i-eligible if there exists a (P, i )-tree rooted at (q, γ ).Observe that if a state q is not i-eligible, every ∀-strategy tree τ rooted at state q has a branch that is either (i) bounded by stack height i and winning for ∃-player (so, has no invalid pops), or (ii) exceeds stack height i.

▶ Lemma D.7. Suppose p ∈ Q is i-eligible and g ∈ M∆ has ∥g∥ > |Q|. Then (p, wg ) is the root of some (∅, i )-tree for every w ∈ { [ε]} ∪ { [uγ ] | u ∈ (V ∪ ¯V )∗}.

The lemma implies that every configuration (q, [u]) where q is i-eligible for some i, and the top-of-the-stack group element of u is “big”, is won by ∀. So, whenever we come accross such a configuration, we can declare victory! As explained in Section 7, we use Cayley automaton , an automaton version of Cayley graph , to track the “small” group elements, and declare victory on “big” ones. Here, we introduce this automaton formally. 

Cayley automaton Cayley automaton C≤| Q| = ( C, ΣC , δ C , [ε]) is defined over the state set 

C and the alphabet ΣC = W ∪ ¯W . The state set C consists of the set of congruence classes 

[g] s.t. g ∈ M∆ and ∥g∥ ≤ | Q| together with a trap state ctrap . The initial state of the automaton is [ε], the congruence class of ε.For every u, u ′ ∈ (W ∪ ¯W )∗ with ∥u∥ ≤ | Q| and every w ∈ (W ∪ ¯W ∪ ε) s.t. [uw ] = [ u′],if ∥u′∥ ≤ | Q|, then there is a transition [u] w

−→ [u′] in δC ; otherwise, there is a transition 

[u] w

−→ ctrap .In other words, the Cayley automata starts from the empty word, and keeps track of group elements of word length at most |Q|. If the word length exceeds |Q|, it enters a trap 30 Infinite-state games with energy objectives beyond counters 

state. All states of C are accepting. For convenience, we make the Cayley automaton ignore the ¯γ and ∅ transitions, i.e. c ¯γ

−→ c and c ∅

−→ c for every c ∈ C.

# D.5 Calculating the saturation sets via tree automata (Part 2) 

With the introduction of Cayley automaton, we are ready to calculate T iq , which is the product automaton Ai

> G

(q) × PuPo × C ≤| Q|, and the special element ⊤ is [ε] ∈ C.So we claim Lemma D.8 holds for the set R(T iq ) defined below. 

R(T iq ) = {P ⊆ Q | there exists a finite tree τ accepted by T iq such that if p × [ε]

is a leaf of τ, then p ∈ P }

▶ Lemma D.8. R(T i) = Riq for every q ∈ Q.

# D.6 The Base Case 

We will first prove Lemma D.7 and then Lemma D.8 for i = 0 .

▶ Lemma (Lemma D.7 for i = 0 ). Suppose p ∈ Q is 0-eligible and g ∈ M∆ has ∥g∥ > |Q|.Then (p, wg ) is the root of some (∅, 0) -tree for every w ∈ { [ε]} ∪ { [uγ ] | u ∈ (V ∪ ¯V )∗}.

Proof. Let τ be a (P, 0) -tree rooted at (p, γ ). Every leaf of τ is either the first non-right-invertible configuration (q, [u]) of the branch, or (q′, [ε]) with q′ ∈ P led by a pop transition. As the stack height is bounded by 0, the leaf transitions of both kind of leaves are the first pop transitions of their branches. Then the projection tree τ |Q is accepted by A0 

> G

(q) × PuPo .As A0 

> G

(p) has |Q|-many states (plus q∅, but that can only appear on the leaf nodes due to 

PuPo ), we can remove repeating occurrences of inner nodes in τ |Q by cutting a branch at the first occurrence of a node q and attaching the subtree rooted at the last occurrence of an inner node q. We thereby obtain a small witness tree t ∈ A 0 

> G

(p) × PuPo where each branch has length ≤ | Q| + 1 . Note that we get the length |Q| + 1 and not |Q| because we need to preserve the leaf transitions, as PuPo is accepting trees based on leaf transitions. The extension tree t′ = t←(p,wg ) is a (P ′, 0) -tree of height |Q| + 1 . As leaf transitions of 

t′ are pops, any branch of t′ can neutralise a group element of word length at most |Q|. As 

∥g∥ > |Q|, for every leaf (q, [u]) of t′ it holds that [u]̸ ∈ R (MΓ). Therefore, t′ is a (∅, 0) -tree rooted at (p, wg ).

◀▶ Lemma (Lemma D.8 for i = 0 ). R(T 0 

> q

) = R0 

> q

for every q ∈ Q.

The nodes of trees accepted by T 0 

> q

= A0 

> q

×PuPo ×C ≤| Q| are of the form q×c ∈ (Q∪{ q∅})×C.Recall that A0 

> G

(q) × PuPo accepts the set of all finite prefix subtrees of ∀-strategy trees rooted at q, that contain no pushes , and each branch has exactly one pop – that is as the leaf transition. Then the leaf transitions p × c ¯γ

−→ r × c of trees accepted by T 0 

> q

are also pops, the Cayley component c does not change at the lead transition, as the Cayley automaton skips pops. As the inner transitions (i.e. not leaf transitions) of the tree are labelled with 

g ∈ (W ∪ ¯W ∪ { ε}), (i) c = ctrap if there exists a (topmost) ancestor node (q′, [u′]) with 

∥u′∥ > |Q|, (ii) c = [ u]̸ = [ ε] if the word length has not exceeded |Q| and the leaf transition is an invalid pop, and (iii) c = [ ε] if the leaf transition is a valid pop. By Lemma D.7 for the base case, we know that there is a (∅, 0) -tree t rooted at (q′, [u′]) . For every branch (i), we replace the subtree rooted at (q′, [u′]) with t. We thereby obtain a tree τ in T 0 

> q

where I. Sağlam, G. Zetzsche 31 

every leaf is of form (ii) or (iii). Clearly, τ extends to a (P, 0) -tree rooted at (q, γ ) such that if p × [ε] is a leaf of τ , then p ∈ P . This shows R(T 0 

> q

) ⊆ R0 

> q

.The other direction is similar. Let P ∈ R0 

> q

. Then, there is a (P, 0) -tree τ rooted at (q, γ ).The leaves of τ are either (I) the first non-right-invertible configuration of the branch, or (II) a leaf node (q′, [∅]) for q′ ∈ P led by a pop transition. As the stack height is bounded by 0,all leaf transitions of τ are pop transitions – and furthermore, they are the first pops of their branches. (I) corresponds to invalid pops and (II) corresponds to valid pops. Then τ |Q is accepted by T iq and the leaves corresponding to valid pops are of the form q′ × [ε] and the leaves corresponding to invalid pops are of the form q′ × ctrap or q′ × [u]̸ = [ ε]. Then clearly, 

P ∈ R(T 0 

> q

).

# D.7 The Inductive Step 

We describe how to obtain T i+1  

> q

from T iq for every q ∈ Q. This boils down to obtaining Ai+1 

> G

from Ai

> G

.Here is how we obtain Ai+1  

> G

from Ai

> G

: For every push transition (p, γ, r ) ∈ δ (recall that, by our assumption p ∈ Q∀), add the following new transitions to Ai 

> G

to obtain Ai+1  

> G

: For every 

∅̸ = R ∈ Rir , add to Λ+ a new ε-transition from p to R, i.e. add Λ+ 

> p

(p) = ( ε, r 1) × . . . × (ε, r m)

where R = {r1, . . . , r m}. This transition allows the trees accepted by the tree automaton to branch out at p to r1, . . . , r m via ε-edges. Intuitively, if there exists a strategy τ ∈ A i

> G

(r)

that allows (r, γ ) to reach a set R′ ⊆ R via 0-valid pops, then we allow p to arrive at all nodes in R without changing its stack content. This transition corresponds to the universal player strategy from p of taking the edge p γ

−→ r and then following the ∀-strategy τ of stack height bounded by i until he reaches the nodes in R. If ∅ ∈ Rir , then there is a winning 

∀-strategy from r stack height bounded by i. In this case, add the transition Λ+ 

> p

(p) = ( ∅, q ∅)

to Λ. This will allow PuPo to recognise this state as “already won” by ∀-player and allow a branch to end with the leaf transition r ∅

−→ q∅.We assign T i+1  

> q

= Ai+1  

> G

(q) × PuPo × C ≤| Q| for every q ∈ Q.With the inductive hypothesis that Lemmas D.7 and D.8 holds for all k ≤ i, we prove them for i + 1 .

▶ Lemma (Lemma D.7 for i + 1 ). Suppose p ∈ Q is (i + 1) -eligible and g ∈ M∆ has ∥g∥ > |Q|.Then (p, wg ) is the root of some (∅, i + 1) -tree for every w ∈ { [ε]} ∪ { [uγ ] | u ∈ (V ∪ ¯V )∗}.

Proof. Let τ be a (P, i + 1) -tree rooted at (p, γ ). Every leaf of τ is either the first non-right-invertible configuration (q, [u]) of the branch (i.e. an invalid pop), or (q′, [ε]) with q′ ∈ P

led with a pop transition (i.e. a 0-valid pop). Once more, all leaf transitions of τ are pops. However this time, they do not need to be the first pops of their branches. Due to the bounded stack height of i + 1 , the branches are allowed to have (i + 1) push and matching pops before arriving at an invalid, or a 0-valid pop. Consider a subtree τ ′ rooted at the node reached via the first push of a branch of τ . So, τ ′ is rooted at some (r′, [uγ ]) with the parent (r, [u]) . Then consider its finite prefix subtree that is a (P ′, i ) tree rooted at (r′, γ ).That is, each leaf is either an invalid pop reached within a pop depth of i, or a 0-valid pop from (r′, γ ), reaching a node in P ′ ⊆ Q. Due to the I.H., the set of nodes P ′ the nodes in τ ′

reached via 0-valid pops, is in Riq . Thus, there is an ε-transition from r to P ′ in Ai+1  

> G

. If 

P ′ = ∅, the transition is r ∅

−→ q∅.We go through the branches of τ from top to bottom, and repeat the following procedure until there are no pushes left. Find the first (r, [u]) leading to some (r′, [uγ ]) . Replace the subtree rooted at (r, [u]) and ends at the leaves of the (P ′, i )-subtree rooted at (r′, [γ]) , with 32 Infinite-state games with energy objectives beyond counters 

the transition rooted at (r, [u]) and has children (p1, [u]) , . . . , (pℓ, [u]) for P ′ = {p1, . . . , p l},where each edge is labelled with ε; if P ′ = ∅, replace it with the transition (r, [u]) ∅

−→ (q∅, [u]) .The resulting tree ˜τ has no pushes. Furthermore, all leaf transitions are either (i) ∅-transitions, or (ii) the first pop of the branch. (i) is the case if the branch has an invalid pop with stack height < i + 1 . (ii) is the case if either the leaf is a node (q′, [ε]) (a 0-valid pop), or the leaf transition is an invalid-pop and the branch has stack height exactly i + 1 . In any case, ˜τ |Q is accepted by Ai+1  

> G

(q) × PuPo as, ˜τ has no pushes, every leaf transition is either 

∅-transition, or the first pop of the branch; and the transitions we used to replace subtrees of 

τ exist in Ai+1  

> G

.Now we are ready to replicate the argument from the proof of the lemma for the base case. As the automaton Ai+1  

> G

has |Q|-many states (used as inner nodes of a tree), and there is a tree ˜τ |Q rooted at p that accepted by Ai+1  

> G

(q) × PuPo , there is a small witness tree t rooted at p of height ≤ | Q| + 1 that is also accepted by Ai+1  

> G

(q) × PuPo . Applying the ∀-strategy t

from root configuration (p, wg ) gives an (∅, i + 1) -tree, as before. ◀

Lemma D.7 for i + 1 shows that in the product T i+1  

> q

= Ai+1  

> G

× PuPo × C ≤| Q| the nodes with Cayley component ctrap are indeed nodes from which ∀ has a winning strategy. So, the Cayley component works correctly in distinguishing “small” and “big” elements at iteration 

i + 1 .

▶ Lemma (Lemma D.8 for i + 1 ). R(T i+1  

> q

) = Ri+1  

> q

for every q ∈ Q.

Proof. Let us first show R(T i+1  

> q

) ⊆ Ri+1  

> q

. Let τ be a tree accepted by T i+1  

> q

and let P be the set of leaves p × [ε] of τ s.t. p ∈ P . We will show that P ∈ Ri+1  

> q

. By I.H., every ε-transition from p to R in Ai+1  

> G

represents a push transition p γ

−→ r ∈ δ and a (R, i )-subtree rooted at 

(r, γ ). Similarly, a ∅-transition represents a (∅, i )-subtree rooted at (r, γ ). Replacing the ∅-and ε-transitions in τ with the respective subtrees, we obtain a (P ′, i + 1) -tree rooted at 

(q, γ ). Now we need to show P ′ = P . But this follows from the facts that (i) ε-transitions indeed represent subtrees where the leaves are reached from the root with the same stack content, (ii) by Lemma D.7 that the Cayley component distinguishes “big” configurations as intended in iteration i + 1 .Now let us show R(T i+1  

> q

) ⊇ Ri+1  

> q

. Let P ∈ Ri+1  

> q

and let τ be the (P, i + 1) -tree rooted at 

(q, γ ). The leaves of τ are either (I) the first non-right-invertible configuration of the branch (so, an invalid pop), or (II) a leaf node (q′, [ε]) for q′ ∈ P led by a pop transition (so, a 0-valid pop). Similar to the proof of Lemma D.7 for i + 1 , we go over the branches of τ from top to bottom repeatedly, and for each push (r, [u]) γ

−→ (r, [uγ ]) replace the subtree starting at (r, [u]) and ending at the leaves of the (P, i )-subtree rooted at (r′, γ ), with ε-transitions from (r, [u]) to (pi, [u]) for every pi ∈ P . Replace it with (r, [u]) ∅

−→ (q∅, [u]) is P = ∅. These transitions clearly exist in Ai+1  

> G

. The resulting tree ˜τ has no pushes, and as it is obtained from a (P, i + 1) -tree τ , each leaf transition of ˜τ is either ∅, or the first pop of the branch. As the ε- and ∅-transitions used to replace subtrees all exist in Ai+1  

> G

, ˜τ |Q ∈ A i+1  

> G

(q) × PuPo .Let ˜τ |Q × C be ˜τ |Q extended with the Cayley components in T i+1  

> q

. Lastly, we need to ensure that the set P of nodes reached via valid pop transitions in ˜τ are exactly the set of nodes p × [ε] in ˜τ |Q × C. The fact that ∅-transitions correspond to invalid pops with stack height comes ≤ i from the I.H. So we only need to ensure that the Cayley automaton distinguishes the “big” configurations correctly in iteration i + 1 . However, this comes from the proof of Lemma D.7 for i + 1 , as explained above. This concludes the proof. 

◀I. Sağlam, G. Zetzsche 33 

# D.8 Complexity and Correctness 

The saturation algorithm saturates the tree automaton A0 

> G

on |Q| + 1 states by adding transitions. As the number of transitions that can be added is exponential, the saturation takes at most exponentially many steps. At each step, a calculation is performed on the exponential sized automaton A0 

> G

× PuPo × C ≤| Q|. As explained in Section 7, each step requires at most exponential time, as we can find the minimal representative of a word over ∆ in 

EXP . So, the overall complexity of the saturation procedure is EXP .At the end of the saturation, we obtain the set Rq for each q ∈ Q. We know by Lemma D.6 that ∅̸ ∈ Rqi if and only if (qinit , γ ) is won by ∃-player. To compute the winner of (qinit , ε ),it is sufficient to adjust the game arena slightly by adding an initial pop ( ¯γ) transition preceeding every outgoing transition of qinit (WLOG assuming qinit has no self-loops). Then 

(qinit , γ ) is won by ∃ in the adjusted game arena if and only if (qinit , ε ) is won by ∃ in the original game arena. 

# E Additional Material for Section 8 

In this section, we provide the proofs missing in Section 8. 

▶ Theorem 8.1. If the viability game UV (G) is won by ∃, then ∃ wins (qinit , [λ]) where qinit 

is the initial state of G and λ ∈ (V ∪ ¯V )∗ where |λ|γ < 2n and ∥λ∥ ≤ n.

We will prove Thm. 8.1 in two parts. In Thm. E.1 we will show that the PD -length of λ

can be bounded by 2n and in Thm. E.2 we will show that the word length of a group element inbetween two pushes of λ can be bounded by n.

▶ Theorem E.1. If ∃ wins (qinit , [λ′]) for some initial credit λ′, she also wins (qinit , [λ]) for some initial credit λ where |λ|γ < 2n.

Proof of Thm. E.1. We show that whenever ∃ wins G with the initial credit λ′ with |λ′|γ > 2n,we can find some λ with |λ|γ < |λ′|γ such that she wins the game with initial credit λ too. Take λ′ = [ wr+1 γw r · · · γw 1] where r > 2n and fix a winning ∃-strategy tree τ rooted at 

(qinit , λ ′). We first make some observations: 

a. In every branch of τ , a maximal suffix γw s · · · γw 1 of λ′ is popped. We call s the popping depth of this branch. 

b. If a branch of τ reaches (q, [u]) after popping a suffix γw d · · · γw 1 of λ′, then 

(q, [wr+1 γw r · · · γw d+1 ]) is won by ∃.

c. Every branch of τ eventually reaches some (q, [u]) s.t. (q, [ε]) is won by ∃.

d. If (q, [u]) is won by ∃ then so is (q, [vu ]) for any v, u ∈ (V ∪ ¯V )∗.We represent the branches of τ by the following finite representation: 

bi := qi

> 0¯γ

−→ qi

> 1¯γ

−→ . . . ¯γ

−→ qisi

where for all i, qi 

> 0

= qinit , and for j ∈ [1 , s i], each edge qij−1¯γ

−→ qij represents consecutive sections in the branch where qij−1[wj−1]

−−−−→

> ∗

p ¯γ

−→ qij . Furthermore, qisi is the first state in the branch where (qisi , [ε]) is won by ∃ (which exists by Obs. c). As edges represent consecutive pops in λ′, for all i, si ≤ r. We further restrict the branches to their first 2n-many pops ( ¯γ ) of λ′, whereas for i where the popping depth 

si < 2n, we pad the branch with ε edges on a state p visited infinitely often in the rest of the 34 Infinite-state games with energy objectives beyond counters 

branch where (p, [ε]) is won by ∃; until the length is exactly 2n (such a p exists due to Obs. c and pigeonhole principle). We will denote this restriction of each branch bi by bi, that is, 

bi := 

{qi

> 0¯γ

−→ qi

> 1¯γ

−→ . . . ¯γ

−→ qi 

> 2n

if si ≥ 2n and 

qi

> 0¯γ

−→ qi

> 1¯γ

−→ . . . ¯γ

−→ qisi

> ε

−→ qisi+1 = p ε

−→ . . . ε

−→ qi 

> 2n

= p if si < 2n (2) Note that in the case where si < 2n, both (qsi

, [ε]) and (p, [ε]) are won by ∃. The 

ε-transitions inbetween them do not imply that p can be reached from qsi

with the same stack content; they simply denote that fact that we do not pop the stack any further to win from these nodes. We will denote the set of all bi by B. Note that B is a finite set. We claim the following. 

Claim: There exist two indices j < ℓ ∈ [1 , 2n] such that for every k ≤ | B| there exists a 

k′ ≤ | B| such that qkj = qk′ 

> ℓ

.We first argue that if the claim holds, then Thm. E.1 is proven. Let λ′|<i = γw i−1 · · · γw 1 and λ′|≥i = wr+1 γw r · · · γw i. Then the claim implies that 

(qinit , λ ) is won by ∃, for λ = [ λ′|≥ℓ · λ′|<j ]. In particular, it implies that for every branch of τ , there exists a state p and a suffix suf = γw d · · · γw 1 of λ′|<j s.t. qinit 

> suf

−−→ ∗ p 3 and 

(p, λ ′|≥ℓ · pre ) is won by ∃. Here pre is the prefix of λ′|<j that satisfies pre · suf = λ′|<j .In particular, for the branch bk, if sk ≥ j, then p is qkj , and suf = λ′|<j (therefore, 

pre = ε); otherwise, p is qksk and suf = γw sk −1 · · · γw 1 since the branch bk only pops this suffix of λ′. In the latter case, (p = qksk , [ε]) is won by ∃, then so is (v, [λ′|≥ℓ · pre ]) by Obs. d. In the former case, branch bk′

will witness that (p, [λ′|≥ℓ]) = ( p, [λ′|≥ℓ · pre ]) is won by ∃:If sk′

≥ ℓ, then δk′

reaches p = qkj = qk′ 

> ℓ

by popping λ|<ℓ ; thus, (p, [λ′|≥ℓ]) is won by ∃ by Obs. b. Otherwise, if sk′

< ℓ , then (p = qkj = qk′ 

> ℓ

, [ε]) is won by ∃, then so is (p, [λ′|≥ℓ]) by Obs. d. This shows that every branch of τ reaches a state p via popping a suffix suf of λ′|<j 

such that (p, [λ′|≥ℓ · pre ]) is won by ∃. Therefore, every branch of τ wins qinit with the initial credit [λ′|≥ℓ · pre · suf ] = λ′|≥ℓ · λ′|<j = λ. So, (qinit , λ ) is won by ∃, which proves Thm. E.1 as |λ|γ < |λ′|γ due to j < ℓ .Now we prove the claim. For i ∈ [1 , 2n], let Si be the set of all states q ∈ Q that appear as qi for some branch, i.e. Si := {qji | j ∈ [1 , |B|]}. Clearly 1 ≤ | Si| ≤ | Q| for all i. Then 

Si is a non-empty subset of Q, therefore can get 2n − 1 many different values. It follows by pigeonhole principle that there are two different indices j < ℓ ∈ [1 , 2n] such that Sj = Sℓ.Clearly, the statement of the claim holds over j and ℓ, which concludes the proof of the claim. 

◀

In Thm. E.1, we have given an upper bound on the number of pushdown letters (or, pushes) in an initial credit. Next, we give an upper bound on the word length of the group elements between two pushdown letters. 

▶ Theorem E.2. If ∃ wins (qinit , [λγwγλ ′]) where w is a group element with ∥w∥ > n , she also wins (qinit , [γλ ′]) .Proof Sketch of Thm. E.2 . Let τ be a winning ∃-strategy tree rooted at (qinit , [λγwγλ ′]) .Every branch of τ reaches some (p, [λγw ]) , which is won by ∃ (as all nodes of τ are). We claim that (p, [ε]) is also won by ∃ because otherwise, there would be a winning ∀-strategy rooted at (p, [ε]) . Then there would also one of height ≤ | Q| + 1 where every leaf transition is a ¯γ (recall from the small witness trees in the proof of Lemma D.7). This small winning  

> 3Here, the edge relation is restricted to the chosen branch.

I. Sağlam, G. Zetzsche 35 

∀-strategy tree would allow ∀ to win (p, [λγw ]) as non of its branches is long enough to pop 

w before reaching a pop ¯γ. By this contradiction, we conclude that indeed, for all such 

p, (p, [ε]) is won by ∃. It then follows that (qinit , [γλ ′]) is also won by ∃. Hence, ∃ wins 

(qinit , [γλ ′]) . ◀

Proof of Thm. E.2. Let τ be a winning ∃-strategy tree rooted at (qinit , [λγwγλ ′]) . Every branch of τ reaches some (p, [λγw ]) , which is won by ∃ (as all nodes of τ are). We claim that 

(p, [ε]) is also won by ∃. The claim implies (qinit , [γλ ′]) is won by ∃ – i.e. ∃ wins (qinit , [γλ ′]) 

– and ends the proof. Assume to the contrary that some (p, [ε]) is won by ∀. Then, there exists a winning 

∀-strategy tree rooted at (p, [ε]) . Let τ p be this (finite) ∀-strategy tree, where every branch stops at their first invalid pop ¯γ. Let the stack height of τ p be bounded by i (such an i

exists by Claim D.5). Then τ p is a (∅, i )-tree rooted at (p, [ε]) . In particular, note that all leaf transitions of τ p are (invalid) pop. We obtain a tree ˜τ p from τ p by iteratively replacing the subtrees starting with pushes by transitions in Ai 

> G

as in the proofs of Lemmas D.7 and D.8 for i + 1 . Then ˜τ p has no pushes left, and have pops only at the leaf transitions, i.e. ˜τ p|Q ∈ A i 

> G

× PuPo . As the tree automaton has |Q|-many states, there exists a small witness tree t rooted at p with height ≤ | Q| + 1 accepted by Ai 

> G

× PuPo . Using the ∀-strategy represented by t rooted at (p, [λγw ]) allows ∀ to win, as the branches of t are not long enough to consume the group element w before the pop at the leaf transition – rendering all pops invalid. This gives us the required contradiction, and concludes the proof. 

◀

Now we bring everything together for the proof of Thm. 8.1. 

Proof of Thm. 8.1. For an initial credit λ ∈ (V ∪ ¯V )∗ Thm. E.1 proves that |λ|γ < 2n and Thm. E.2 proves that ∥λ∥ ≤ n. ◀

# E.1 Reducing UV (G) to FV (G)

In this section, we will give a polynomial reduction from UV (G) to FV (G). Given a PD (Grp )

game arena G, we construct a polynomially sized PD (Grp ) game arena Gguess that allows 

∃-player to pick any initial credit λ that respects the structure given in Thm. 8.1, and then enter the game G. It follows from Thm. 8.1 that FV (G) and UV (G) are won by the same player. As Gguess is polynomially sized, this gives an EXP decision procedure for UV (G).In order to construct the game Gguess for every G, we need a subgame that allows the existential player to collect any initial credit λ s.t. |λ|γ < 2n and ∥λ∥ ≤ n. The difficulty in constructing such a subgame is, if we do it naively and add a loop on an ∃-controlled subgame with group elements or γ, the existential player takes this loop forever to win. So, we need a machinery that allows the universal player to punish the existential player if λ

violates the structure – in particular, if |λ|γ ≥ 2n.In order to count up to 2n with a polynomially sized subgame, we will adopt a technique from DFAs. 

▶ Lemma 8.2. For every m ∈ N, there are m two-state DFAs (Di)i∈[1 ,m ] over γ[1 ,m ] such that ⋂ 

> i∈[1 ,m ]

L(Di) is suffix-closed and has a unique longest word of length 2m − 1.

Proof of Lemma 8.2. We explicity define the DFA set (Di)i∈[1 ,m ]. For the sake of simplicity in explaining the acceptance condition, we will picture imaginary ⊥ symbols at the start and the end of every word. Then, verbally D1 accepts all words over Σ that have at most one γ1

inbetween each ⊥ (so, at most one γ1 in total). D2 accepts all words that have at most one 36 Infinite-state games with energy objectives beyond counters 

γ2 inbetween each γ ∈ { γ1, ⊥} . D3 accepts all words that have at most one γ3 inbetween each γ ∈ { γ1, γ 2, ⊥} , and so on. 

Di is given in Fig. 4. The accepted language of Di is the set of all words over Σ that visit at most one γi inbetween each pair of letters from the set {γ1, . . . , γ i−1, ⊥} . Let w be a word of maximal length in ⋂ 

> i∈[1 ,m ]

L(Di). Then, w contains one γ1. The number of γ2s it can contain is one less than the number of {⊥ , γ 1} it contains, as it has one γ2 inbetween each character from this set. In general, for each i ∈ [1 , m ], w contains 2i−1-many γis. So the length of w is Σi∈[1 ,m ]2i−1 = 2 m − 1, ignoring the ⊥ symbols. It is easy to see that w is the unique word of this length. Lastly, let us observe that L is suffix-closed. Let w′′ · w′ = w ∈ L. We want to show that 

w′ ∈ L. As we will be investigating the membership of w and w′ in L, we will again imagine 

⊥ symbols at the start and the end of these words. Assume w′̸ ∈ L. Then there exists a Di,

w′ is not in the language of. Then, w′ has at least two γi inbetween some characters from the set {γ1, . . . , γ i−1, ⊥} . Let w′ = ⊥uγ iu′γiu′′ ⊥. If u contains a γj with j ∈ [1 , i − 1] , then 

w is also not in the language of Di. If u does not contain any such γj , w = ⊥ · w′′ · w′ and either w′′ contains such a γj , or the ⊥ in the beginning serves as this violating character. In any case, w cannot be in the language of Di; which causes a contradiction. 

◀▶ Theorem E.3. There exists a polynomial sized PD (Grp ) game arena Gguess such that 

∃-player wins UV (G) if and only if she wins FV (Gguess ).

Proof of Thm. E.3. Recall that G = (Γ , Q = Q∃ ⊔ Q∀, δ, q init ) where Γ ∈ PD (Grp ) where the pushdown alphabet is {γ} and the group alphabet is W . Then formally, Gguess =(Γ guess , Q guess = Qguess  

> ∃

⊔ Qguess  

> ∀

, δ guess , p init ) where Γguess ∈ PD (Grp ) where the pushdown alphabet is {γ0, . . . , γ n} and the group alphabet is W , Qguess  

> ∃

= Q∃ ∪ { pinit } ∪ { pj , p ′ 

> j

, d ij , ˜dij |

j ∈ [0 , n ], i ∈ [1 , n ]} ∪ { d1 

> i

, d 2 

> i

| i ∈ [1 , n ]} ∪ { , } and Qguess  

> ∀

= Q∀ ∪ { ch }.The game is given in Fig. 3. The initial state pinit leads to p0 by pushing a new pushdown letter, γ0, which is not pushed anywhere else in the game, and is popped by the existential player in the subgames Di to check the emptiness of the stack (in Fig. 4 (b)). Intuitively, at the p0 − pn loop, the existential player tries to accumulate an initial credit that allows her to win the game UV (G). By Thm. 8.1, we know that if such an initial credit exists, then there exists one such that λ = wr+1 γw r · · · γw 1 with r < 2n and ∥λ∥ ≤ n. So, the existential player will try to accumulate this stack content λ, with one ceveat: She will choose the γ’s to fit the unique longest word w∩ accepted by ∩i∈[1 ,n ]Di. Then the stack content λ′ that the existential player aims to accumulate is wr+1 γr wr γr−1 · · · γ1w1 such that γr · · · γ1 (called the push-sequence of λ′) is the r-length suffix of w∩4. She accumulates λ′ by taking the loop on pn r-times by and pushing λ′ in reverse. The last time she is at p0, it’s stack has 

wr+1 γr wr γr−1 · · · w2γ1 which she multiplies with w1 as she reaches pn, then she proceeds to the initial state of the game arena G[γ ← γ[1 ,n ]]: The game arena G where each push transition p γ

−→ r is replaced by n-many push transitions p γi

−→ r for each i ∈ [1 , n ]. Similarly each pop transition p ¯γ

−→ r is replaced by n-many pop transitions p′ ¯γi

−→ r for each i ∈ [1 , n ]

where p′ = p if p ∈ Q∃; and otherwise, p′ is a new existential state introduced together with the transition p ε

−→ p′. It is not hard to see ∃-player wins G[γ ← γ[1 ,n ]] with the initial credit 

λ′ if and only if she wins G with the initial credit λ.    

> 4Actually, here we need the reverse of w∩as the initial credit will be popped by

⋂ Di, but we simply use  

> w∩as it is a palindrome.

I. Sağlam, G. Zetzsche 37 

While accumulating the initial credit λ′, the universal player can challange the existential player after every push γi, at his state ch , and claim that the push-sequence of the accumulated initial credit is not in ⋂ 

> i∈[1 ,n ]

L(Di). He does so by taking the edge from ch to ∩i∈[1 ,n ]Di: this is a subgame whose initial states are di in Di for each i ∈ [1 , n ], where Di is the game-version of the DFA Di given in Fig. 4 (b). When the universal player enters the challange, he proceeds to pick the DFA Di he claims the initial credit violates, and moves to the initial state di of Di. The game-versions Di are different from the DFAs Di in two ways. First, the DFAs push γi whereas the game-versions pop them, as they are trying to read the initial credit. As w∩ is a palindrome, ∩i∈[1 ,n ]Di pushes it and ∩i∈[1 ,n ]Di pops it. Secondly, as the initial credit is allowed to have group elements of word length at most n inbetween each push, each state of Di allows n-word length group elements to be consumed inbetween each pop (which is hidden in the figure). We assure this by putting a sequence of n-states –a copy of the sequence p0 → · · · → pn– inside “states” di and ˜di. So the “state” di actually consists of n-states di

> 0

, . . . , d in such that there is an edge dij−1

> g

−→ dij for each j ∈ [1 , n ], and for each g ∈ W ∪ ¯W ∪ { ε}. Similarly, the “state” ˜di consists of n-states ˜di

> 0

, . . . , ˜din. Every edge depicted as entering di and ˜di in the figure, actually enters di 

> 0

and ˜di

> 0

; and every edge depicted as leaving di and ˜di actually leaves din and ˜din, respectively. If the accumulated initial created has a push-sequence that violates the language of Di,or contains a group element of word length larger than n, then Di enters the state , or pops a wrong γj at di or ˜di, which causes the existential player to lose the game. Otherwise, the existential player correctly pops all the γj s, and reaches the first symbol γ0 of the stack without reaching . Then she pops γ0, enters and wins the game. Assume the existential player wins UV (G). Let λ be an initial credit with |λ|γ < 2n and 

∥λ∥ ≤ n such that the existential player wins G with the initial credit λ. If the universal player does not challenge the exitential player, she wins the game by accumulating the λ′

described above, and entering G[γ ← γ[1 ,n ]]. If the universal player challanges, then the play enters a subgame Di where the stack content is a prefix of λ′. The existential player wins the subgame if the stack content is exactly λ′, as (i) |λ′|γ < 2n and ∥λ∥ ≤ n, and (ii) the push-sequence of λ′ is w∩. She also wins Di entered with any prefix of λ′ in the stack, as ∩i∈[1 ,n ]L(Di) is suffix-closed (therefore, ∩i∈[1 ,n ]Di is won by a prefix-closed set of stack content); and (i) naturally holds for prefices of λ′. So, the existential player wins Gguess with the initial credit ε if she wins UV (G).Now assume the universal player wins UV (G). Then there exists no initial credit λ the existential player wins G, and therefore Gguess , with. Then the only way for the existential player to win in Gguess is to avoid entering the game arena G[γ ← γ[1 ,n ]]. For this, she nxeeds to take the loop p0 − pn forever. This strategy of ∃-player allows the ∀-player wait until the accumulated stack content λ′ achieves the PD -length 2n and challange at his state ch . As the push-sequence of λ′ is longer than 2n, it is not accepted by ∩i∈[1 ,n ]Di. Let Di be a DFA that rejects the push-sequence of λ′. Then the universal player wins by entering the subgame 

Di, as the existential player will not be able to pop the push-sequence of λ′ correctly in this subgame. We conclude that the existential player wins UV (G) if and only if she wins FV (Gguess ). ◀

# F Additional Material for Section 9 

This section consists of undecidability proofs for the illegal graphs given in Fig. 2. In the first subsection, we provideundecidability proof for illegal graphs (iii) and (iv), reducing from pushdown energy games. In the next two subsections we provide the undecidability 38 Infinite-state games with energy objectives beyond counters 

of illegal graphs (ii) and (i), respectively, using a novel gadget construction. As reductions in Sections F.2 and F.3 both use counter machines, we introduce counter machines in the beginning of Section F.2. The results of the last two subsections together prove Thm. 9.2. 

# F.1 Undecidability of illegal graphs (iii) and (iv) 

We first show the equivalence of pushdown energy games([1]) and viability games on 

PD × VASS graphs. Then using this equivalence, we will prove Thm. 9.1. 

Equivalence of pushdown energy games([1]) and viability games on PD × VASS graphs 

An m-dimensional pushdown energy game is a tuple (QE = QE 

> ∃

∪ QE

> ∀

, ΣE, δ E, m ) where QE and 

ΣE are as in non-termination games on pushdown game graphs, m is the dimension of energy and δE ⊆ QE × ΣE × QE × (Σ E)∗ × {− 1, 0, 1}m introduces a game graph over QE × (Σ E)∗ × Zm

as follows: If (p, γ, q, w, c ) ∈ δE, then (p, γv, E ) → (q, wv, E ′) where E′ = E + c.Here, the universal player wins every play in which the Z-component reaches a negative value. The existential player wins every other play. We assume WLOG that every configura-tion (q, w, E ) has an outgoing transition. This assumption can be made, since every state can be enriched with dummy outgoing pop transitions for every pushdown letter γ leading to losing or winning trap states that have self loops of −1 or 0 accordingly. We will show that an m-dimensional pushdown energy game is equivalent to a viability game on a graph Γ ∈ PD × VASS graph such that the VASS subgraph is an m-clique, i.e. 

Γ = ( U ∪ V, E ) where there are no edges on the set U and (V, E ) is a clique on m-nodes. Note that the reduction is not polynomial, but we do not need it to be, since we use it to show that viability game games on PD × VASS inherit the undecidability of pushdown energy games. First, we reduce a viability game on graph Γ = ( U ∪ V, E ) to a m-dimensional pushdown energy game with stack alphabet ΣE = U . We use the counters to mimic the increment and decrement of letters in V = {v1, . . . , v m} in a straighforward manner: We use counter i

increments to mimic vi transitions, and counter i decrements to mimic ¯vi transitions. What is slightly less obvious is how to mimic the forbidden pop transitions , i.e. pop transitions that give rise to non-right-invertible pushdown configurations. These transitions are allowed for the universal player in viability games, letting him win the game; but are disallowed in the pushdown energy game. We raplace every pop p ¯γ

−→ q in viability game where p is a universal node, with three transitions p ε

−→ p′ ¯γ

−→ q where p′ is a new existential state. As before, this shifts the burden of the non-right-invertibility to the existential player. Then, we add additional ε-transition from p′ to a trap state that is ∀-winning and has an (−1) -self loop. This makes sure that every configuration has an outgoing transition, and still the universal player wins in both games, if the state p is reached with stack content with top-of-stack other than γ. We do not need to replace pop transitions on existential states, as the existential player already avoids these states in viability games. Finally, we reduce an m-dimensional pushdown energy game to a viability game on Γ.We use the letters of the VASS alphabet V to mimic the Z counters in the pushdown energy game in a straightforward manner. To mimic forbidden transitions, we apply a gadget similar to the one from the reduction of non-termination games on pushdown graphs. Whenever there is a pop transition p ¯γ

−→ q for γ ∈ ΣE defined on a universal state p in the pushdown energy game, we replace it with the transitions p ε

−→ p′ ¯γ

−→ q and the transitions p′ ¯γi

−→ for every γi ∈ ΣE \ { γ} where p′ is a fresh existential state and is an ∃-winning state with a 0-self loop. This makes sure that the universal player takes the pop transitions in the I. Sağlam, G. Zetzsche 39 

reduced viability game only when it is reached with γ as top-of-stack-symbol. Note that again, we do not need to alter pop transitions originating from ∃-player nodes, as ∃-player already avoids them in the viability game. 

▶ Theorem 9.1. Let Γ be one of the valence graphs (iii) or (iv). Then FV (Γ) and UV (Γ) 

are both undecidable. 

Proof of Thm. 9.1. The undecidability (both FV and UV variants) of (iii), which corresponds to 2-PD ×1-VASS , follows from the work of Abdulla et al [1]. The authors show ‘For pushdown energy games, both the fixed and the unknown initial credit problem are undecidable, even if the energy is just single-dimensional’. As explained in Section F.1, pushdown energy games with 2 pushdown letters and single-dimensional energy corresponds to 2-PD × 1-VASS in our framework. The undecidability of (iv) follows from a reduction from (iii) to (iv): Assume that the vertices in graph (iii) and (iv) represent letters a, b, c from left-to-right. For a given valence game arena G over the graph (iii), we will construct an equivalent valence game arena G′

whose over the graph (iv); both over the alphabet V ∪ ¯V where V = {a, b, c }. Both arenas are on the same finite game graph, have the same initial state, and the transitions of G are inherited directly from G′ except for the ones labelled c or ¯c. The c transitions of G are turned into cac transitions in G′; and similarly, the ¯c transitions of G are turned into ¯c¯a¯c transitions in G′. Then the existential player wins G if and only if she wins G′. This is intuitively because, we mimic the lack of right-invertibility of the letter c in (iii) with the lac of right-invertibility of the compound element cac in (iv), while preserving c’s commutativity with b, and lack of commutativity with a. ◀

# F.2 Undecidability of illegal graphs (ii) 

As the results of this subsection, as well as the next, rely on a reduction from counter machines, we first introduce those. 

Counter Machines A counter machine is a finite state machine, equipped with a fixed number of non-negative counters. We consider 2-counter machines, which already capture the Turing-complete behaviour we desire. A 2-counter machine S = ( S, s 0, δ S ) consists of a finite set of control states S, an initial state s0 and a finite set of transitions δM of the form s μ

−→ s′ where s, s ′ ∈ S and 

μ ∈ { inc (i), dec (i), zero (i) | i ∈ { 1, 2} } , where i denotes the counter being incremented, decremented, or being tested for zero. A configuration of S is a triple (s, c 1, c 2) ∈ Q × N2.From a configuration (s, c 1, c 2), the transition w dec (i)

−−−→ w′ is enabled iff s = w and ci̸ = 0 ;the transition w zero (i)

−−−−→ w′ is enabled iff s = w and ci = 0 ; and the transition w inc (i)

−−−→ w′ is enabled iff s = w. A run of S is a (finite or infinite) sequence of enabled transitions that start at the initial configuration (s0, 0, 0) . Without loss of generality, we assume δS to have an transition s → s′ from each control state s ∈ S.2-counter machines are Turing-complete models; therefore all non-trivial properties of them are undecidable, including the existence of an infinite run (or non-termination) problem. In our proofs, we exploit this source of undecidability. 

▶ Theorem F.1. Let Γ be one of the valence graphs represented by (ii). Then FV (Γ) and 

UV (Γ) are both undecidable. 40 Infinite-state games with energy objectives beyond counters 

Proof of Thm. F.1. To show Thm. F.1, we will reduce from the non-termination problem in 2-counter machines. We reduce a 2-counter machine M on the state set V = {v0, . . . , v k}

with the initial state v0 to a viability game over game arena G = (Γ , Q = Q∃ ⊔ Q∀, δ, q init )

for Γ = ( V, E ) given by (ii). The proof works for both graphs: with and without the self-loop on a.The game arena G is on the state set Q = {q0, . . . , q k} ∪ { qinit } ∪ { } ⊆ Q∃ together with a set Q′ ⊆ Q∀ ∪ Q∃ which comes from the gadgets given in Fig. 5, and will be detailed in the proof. There is a transition from qinit to q0 with the compound element ba , as well as an ε

self-loop on . Clearly, every play that reaches ( , [u]) with a right-invertible u is won by the existential player. For every transition viμ

−→ vj in M, where μ ∈ { inc (i), dec (i) | i ∈ { 1, 2} } ,there is a transition qiμ′

−→ qj in G where μ′ is equal to b, c, ¯b and ¯c for μ equal to inc (1) ,

inc (2) , dec (1) and dec (2) , respectively. After mimicing the increments of decrements of 

M easily using b and c, we now need some machinery to mimic the zero tests. For the transition vi

> zero (k)

−−−−→ vj in M, we will add the gadget in Fig. 5 between qi and qj . The gadget introduces a universal player state q∀ 

> i,j

, whose role is to either accept the claim of the zero test by allowing the existential player to move to qj ; or to challange the claim by sending her to the state q∃ 

> i,j

. The existential player wins from q∃ 

> i,j

if and only if the configuration is free of the letter mimicing the counter value checked for zero – i.e. the play reaches (q∃ 

> i,j

, [w]) 

where w = bac m for zero (1) -gadget and w = bab m for zero (2) -gadget, for some m ∈ N. In 

zero (1) -gadget, the self-loop on q∃ 

> i,j

allows the existential player to decrement as many c’s as desired; and in zero (2) -gadget, as many b’s as desired. Notice that the existential player cannot take this self-loop forever, as the number of 

cs and bs cannot go negative (since ¯c and ¯b are non-right-invertible). Then eventually, she needs to take the ¯a¯b transition to . However, this transition can be taken only if the configuration does not contain any b or cs after the ba , as a does not commute with neither 

b nor c, meaning, b¯a¯b and c¯a¯b are both non-right-invertible 5. So, this transition can only be taken if w¯a¯b is right invertible, which requires w to have the suffix ba . In zero (1) case, if the first counter was zero at qi in M as claimed, then in the zero (1) -gadget the existential player arrives at the configuration (q∃ 

> i,j

, [w]) with w = ba · cm, takes the self-loop m-many times, and takes the transition to by removing ba , and wins the game. On the other hand, if the first counter was non-zero at qi in M, then she reaches (q∃ 

> i,j

, [w′]) with w′ = ba · bkcm and can never achieve a configuration (q∃ 

> i,j

, [w]) where w has a suffix ba to allow the transition to ; therefore losing the game. There exists an infinite path in M if and only if ∃-player wins FV (G): Let π be an infinite path in M. Then as b and c commute in (i), all increment and decrements of counter 1

and counter 2 in π are easily mimiced by the existential player in G by the push and pops of b and c. The zero tests vi

> zero (k)

−−−−→ vj for k ∈ { 1, 2} in π branch into two plays in G: one that is challanged by the universal player and immediately reaches , and another that is unchallenged that mimic π through the gadget states qiε

−→ q∀

> i,j ε

−→ qj . If there exist no infinite paths in M, then 6 every path in M ends with an invalid zero-test. Look at such a path π = p1 . . . p m. Then pm has some outgoing edges, each with an invalid zero-test, that is 

pm zero (k)

−−−−→ p for some p ∈ V . Let Π be the set of all such paths in M. The universal player                   

> 5Note that b¯aand c¯aare already non-right-invertible if the first vertex ain (ii) does not have a self-loop. Therefore, the initial transition of a(instead of ba ) and the popping transition of ¯abetween q∃
> i,j and (instead of ¯a¯b) is sufficient in this case. However, when this state has a self-loop, we need the compound element ba to have the same blocking effect.
> 6As we assume no dead-ends.

I. Sağlam, G. Zetzsche 41 

has the following winning strategy in FV (G): On every history that is a strict prefix π′ of a play π ∈ Π, take the non-challenging decision on the gadget state q∀ 

> i,j

, and mimic the path π′.Whenever the history of a play becomes equivalent to π for some π ∈ Π (minus the gadget states), take the challange decision on the gadget state q∀ 

> i,j

, forcing the play to reach q∃ 

> i,j

. As the number of b and cs mimic the values of counters 1 and 2, respectively, the state q∃ 

> i,j

is reached with a wrong number of bs or cs (depending on the zero-test) after the initial ba ,and therefore the existential player loses the game. Observe that the fixed initial empty credit plays no role in the proof. That is, existential player wins FV (G) if and only if she wins UV (G). The ‘if’ direction is trivial. To see the ‘only if’ direction, assume the existential player loses from qinit with an empty initial credit, but wins with some initial credit λ. Let σ be an existential strategy in G that wins (qinit , [λ]) .We will show that σ also wins (qinit , [ε]) . The only places in the game that might cause a 

σ-play π starting from (qinit , [λ]) to be winning, and a σ-play π′ starting from (qinit , [ε]) to be losing are the branches of zero-test gadgets where the universal player challenges the claim, and sends the play to q∃ 

> i,j

. The play π′ reaches (q∃ 

> i,j

, [w]) with w = bab r cm, if and only if π reaches (q∃ 

> i,j

, [w′]) with w′ = λbab r cm. WLOG, assume the gadget is a zero (1) gadget. Then as π is winning, r = 0 and π reaches by taking the self-loop m-times, and proceeding to by removing ba . Then, π′ reaches with the same strategy. Therefore, the reduction works to show the undecidability of UV (G) too. ◀

# F.3 Undecidability of illegal graphs (i) 

▶ Theorem F.2. Let Γ be one of the valence graph represented by (i). Then FV (Γ) and 

UV (Γ) are both undecidable. 

Proof of Thm. F.2. We reduce a 2-counter machine M on the state set V = {v0, . . . , v k}

with the initial state v0 to a viability gameover game arena G = (Γ , Q = Q∃ ⊔ Q∀, δ, q init )

for Γ = ( V, E ) given by (i). As before, the reduced game G is on the state set Q =

{q0, . . . , q k} ∪ { qinit } ∪ { } ⊆ Q∃ together with a set Q′ ⊆ Q∀ ∪ Q∃ which comes from the gadgets given in Fig. 6. Once more, we have the initial transition qinit ba 

−→ q0 in G, and the has an ε-self-loop, ensuring every play reaching ( , [u]) with a right-invertible u is won by the existential player. The gadgets differ from Fig. 5 in two main aspects. Firstly, it is not sufficient to use one letter to mimic one counter in the 2-counter machine, because this time c is not a blocking letter – i.e. a word is right-invertible no matter how many ¯cs it has. As a result, in the 

zero (1) gadget, the ¯c self-loop in Fig. 5 can be taken by the existential player forever to secure an infinite right-invertible play. Therefore, as we will continute to use b to mimic the first counter as in the previous proof, this time we will use bc to mimic the second counter, instead of c. For every transition vi

> inc (i)

−−−→ vj in M, G will have a transition qiμ

−→ qj

where μ = b if i = 1 , and μ = bc if i = 2 . The second difference is, this time we need to check non-emptiness, as well as the emptiness of a counter. This is because, ¯b and ¯c (and consequently ¯b¯c) are not blocking as they were in the zero-test gadgets depicted in Thm. F.1. We explained why ¯c is not blocking, the reason ¯b is not blocking, is due to how we mimic the counters. As the second counter is mimiced using both letters, a configuration (0 , 2) in M

would correspond to a stack content [babbcc ] in G, which would allow b to be popped in the reduced game, even though the first counter is empty in M. We can see that mimicing the decrements using ¯b and ¯b¯c transitions as in the proof of Thm. F.1 this time gives us incorrect behaviour. Therefore, we need gadgets (Fig. 6) to mimic dec (i) as well as zero (i).Intuitively, for every decrement (resp., zero-test) on qi, the existential player moves from 42 Infinite-state games with energy objectives beyond counters 

qi to qi,j , by implementing the correct decrement via ¯b for dec (1) and ¯b¯c for dec (2) . At qi,j ,the universal player either accepts that the decrement is legitimate (that, we decremented counter is non-empty) by moving to qj , or challanges its legitimacy by moving to q∃ 

> i,j

. In both dec (i) gadgets, existential player can decrement as many b’s and bc ’s via the self-loops on q∃ 

> i,j

as desired. Her aim is again to reach (q∃ 

> i,j

, [w]) with some w that has ba as a suffix.It is not hard to see that she can obtain such a [w] only if the decremented counter was non-zero at qi; that is, the decrement was legitimate. Moreover, she cannot proceed to with any other stack content –i.e. [bac mbm+n] where m or n is non-zero– as [b¯a¯b] and [c¯a¯b] are both non-right-invertible. Here, we are using the number of cs and the fact that c and a do not commute to ensure that the number of popped bc s will be equal to the second counter’s value, and the number of popped (remaining) bs will be equal to the first counter’s value. Finally, that existential player cannot take the self-loops on q∃ 

> i,j

forever, as the stack is not allowed to have a negative number of bs. The zero-test gadgets are very similar to those in Fig. 5, except that, of course, the pop corresponding to the second counter is represented by ¯b¯c instead of ¯c. The correctness proof follows analogously. As in the previous proof, the initial stack content does not play a role in the proof. Consequently, the reduction works to show the undecidability of both FV (G) and UV (G). ◀