Title: Structure from Strategic Interaction     Uncertainty: Risk Sensitive Games for Robust Preference Learning

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.09946v2

Published Time: Thu, 14 May 2026 00:20:13 GMT

Number of Pages: 123

Markdown Content:
# Structure from Strategic Interaction & Uncertainty: Risk Sensitive Games for Robust Preference Learning 

## Max Horwitz 1 Jake Gonzales 1 Eric Mazumdar 2 Lillian J. Ratliff 1

## May 14, 2026 

> 1

Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering, University of Washington 

> 2

Computing & Mathematical Sciences, California Institute of Technology 

Abstract 

A growing line of work reframes preference-based fine-tuning of large language models game-theoretically: Nash Learning from Human Feedback (NLHF) recasts the problem as a zero-sum game over policies. However, optimization is over expected pairwise payoffs, thereby conflating policies with similar win rates but different tail behavior. As such, these methods are agnostic to where in the data distribution they succeed or fail: strong average performance can mask systematic failure across prompts, annota-tors, or safety-critical strata. We introduce risk-sensitive preference games, in which players optimize convex risk measures of their preference loss, exploiting structure in preference uncertainty. While risk-sensitivity generally breaks the zero-sum structure, we show that translation invariance of many risk metrics ensures that we retain monotonicity, yielding fast convergence of sample-efficient self-play meth-ods. Furthermore, we establish algorithmic stability and offline sample complexity bounds that scale with risk, requiring simultaneous control of structural bias from nonlinear risk transformations, statisti-cal bias in risk estimation, and concentration tailored to the risk-sensitive setting. To address statistical bias, we introduce a hierarchical game formulation and a two-timescale extragradient algorithm with bias correction that converges to the Stackelberg equilibrium and is especially effective in low-sample regimes. Empirically, risk-adjusted policies are robust across data strata, stable across risk choices, and match or exceed risk-neutral performance thereby achieving robustness without a performance tax. 

# 1 Introduction 

Large language models (LLMs) are increasingly deployed at scale, and with that scale comes a growing record of harm: chatbots coaching teenagers toward suicide (Hill, 2025a); ordinary adults with no prior history of mental illness driven into weeks-long delusional spirals—over simulation theory, AI sentience (Hill, 2025b), fabricated mathematical frameworks that a Toronto recruiter spent three weeks publicly broadcasting to cryptography experts and national security agencies before the spell broke (Hill and Freedman, 2025); models that learn to identify and manipulate the small fraction of users most vulnerable to manipulation (Williams et al., 2025), systems that confidently reinforce delusions while satisfying every aggregate benchmark. These are not isolated failures to be patched one at a time. They are the canary in the mine for a deeper problem in how alignment research is conceived. The dominant paradigm—RLHF and its variants—collapses rich, heterogeneous human preference data into a single scalar reward and optimizes its expectation (see, e.g., (Bai et al., 2022; Christiano et al., 2017b; Munos et al., 2024; Ouyang et al., 2022; Stiennon et al., 2020; Ziegler et al., 2019, 2020)). The structure of human disagreement, the shape of the response distribution, the existence of a long tail of users whose needs differ from the median: all of this information is in the data we collect, and all of it is averaged away before the model ever sees it. Alignment, framed this way, can only be aligned with a fictitious average human; it has no language for the tails where harm actually occurs, and no language for the diversity of legitimate responses that real users require .We argue that alignment research must be reframed. The objective is not to chase down failure modes after the fact, nor to align to a representative user, but to make the tail behavior and the diversity of the response distribution first-class objects of study; that is, quantities the learning algorithm explicitly reasons 1  

> arXiv:2605.09946v2 [cs.GT] 12 May 2026 00.51

same mean 

tail (catastrophic) 

πA

πB   

> win rate P(y≻y′′ )
> density

## (a)      

> 00.25 0.50.75 1
> 0
> 0.25
> 0.5
> 0.75

tail ↑ higher = better     

> robustness gap
> quantile α(small α= tail)
> tail win-rate α
> Prior NLHF
> RS-LHF (ours)

## (b) Figure 1: RSPGs target tail behavior directly. (a) Mean-based methods cannot distinguish two policies with the same average win-rate but very different tails. (b) RSPG policies (teal) maintain tail performance without sacrificing mean win-rate, while prior NLHF methods (red) collapse on the tail. about, rather than artifacts it discards. This motivates our central contribution: extending Nash Learning from Human Feedback (NLHF) with risk-sensitive objectives, so that the equilibrium concept itself reasons about the distribution of outcomes rather than collapsing it to a mean .A recent game-theoretic reformulation, NLHF (Munos et al., 2024), takes a step in this direction by recasting alignment as a two-player constant-sum game in which the preference oracle is the payoff. With a KL penalty to a reference policy, the resulting solution concept is a unique quantal response equilibrium 

(QRE) (McKelvey and Palfrey, 1995), characterized by a fixed-point equation that Nash-MD (Munos et al., 2024) and follow-up algorithms—IPO-MD (Calandriello et al., 2024b), MPO (Wang et al., 2025), EGPO (Zhou et al., 2025)—all target. NLHF recovers the strategic interaction structure that scalar-reward RLHF discards: it sees a preference distribution, not a point estimate. But it stops there. Every method in this line optimizes the expected pairwise payoff and remains blind to the second piece of structure that human preference data carries: uncertainty . A response strongly preferred by part of the population and strongly dispreferred by another is, in expectation, indistinguishable from a broadly acceptable one; a policy that wins on average while occasionally producing catastrophic outputs is indistinguishable from one that never does (cf. Fig. 1). This work closes that gap by introducing Risk-Sensitive Preference Games (RSPG), a framework that integrates structured risk-sensitivity directly into the equilibrium concept of NLHF. Rather than optimizing the expected pairwise payoff, RSPG players reason about the full distribution of preference outcomes—variance, tails, and worst-case responses—yielding equilibria sensitive to exactly the features that scalar-reward RLHF and expectation-based NLHF discard. Risk-sensitivity of this form is consistent with how natural learning agents behave (Mazumdar et al., 2025). Crucially, RSPGs are not a tradeoff: risk reshapes the structural and statistical properties of the equilibrium to deliver robustness and distributional control while preserving mean performance and adding no computational overhead. 

## 1.1 Contributions 

We introduce risk-sensitive preference games (RSPG) in which players account for more facets of the outcome distribution when optimizing. Replacing the expected payoff with a convex risk measure —a class of func-tionals developed in mathematical finance, where they have become standard tools for quantifying tail risk and pricing in incomplete markets (F¨ ollmer and Schied, 2002, 2016)—is the natural way to operationalize this. Doing so changes what alignment is optimizing for: not the average preference outcome but a chosen feature of its distribution, with the choice of risk measure encoding which structure of the harms one cares about. Doing so introduces two distinct difficulties. The first is structural: the constant-sum property of NLHF, which is what makes single-player self-play—computationally far cheaper than multiplayer—sufficient for equilibrium computation, relies on the linearity of expectation, and a nonlinear risk functional generi-cally breaks it. The second is statistical: most risk measures do not admit unbiased sample estimators, so stochastic gradient methods inherit a persistent bias floor that does not vanish with the step size—especially damaging in the low-sample regime of LLM fine-tuning, where data is expensive and bias compounds across iterates. We resolve both. 

• The structural obstruction is illusory. The translation invariance of convex risk measures pre-serves constant-sum structure at the risk-adjusted payoff operator (Lemma 1), even though it fails at 2the certainty-equivalence level. Symmetric self-play thus remains the right algorithm (Theorem 1); risk simply shifts the target to a robust one, and we retain all the computational benefits of running an algorithm that only needs to maintain one policy as opposed to two (one for each player). We prove μR = β − 2λR strong monotonicity of the RSPG (Theorem 2), and therefore existence of a unique equilibrium; last-iterate convergence of deterministic extragradient at rate O((1 − ημ R)t); and linear contraction to a neighborhood of size O(1 /(mμ R)) for stochastic biased extragradient (Proposi-tion 1, and Theorems 11 and 12, for the merely-monotone and strongly monotone settings, respectively, Appendix H). 

• The statistical obstruction is removable. A Stackelberg game with a fast bias-tracking follower (Theorem 3 and Appendix I) reduces the persistent bias floor of plug-in risk estimators to a variance floor faced by any stochastic algorithm. This matters most in the low-sample regime, where statistical bias is reduced to the variance floor faced by any stochastic algorithm. Algorithmic stability (Theo-rem 6) and a fast-rate offline sample complexity guarantee eO(1 /n ) (Theorem 7) match the risk-neutral setting up to constants that scale explicitly with the degree of risk. Risk sensitivity therefore introduces no additional sample-complexity bottleneck, making learning in RSPGs efficient, and is tunable. 

• The framework is Pareto-dominant in practice. Empirically, risk-adjusted policies are robust across data strata and match or exceed risk-neutral baselines (Section 4)— robustness without a perfor-mance tax . Risk-adjustment incurs no statistically significant drop in preference win-rate, while safety and combined win-rates improve consistently across opponents, metrics, and held-out harm strata. The degree of risk sensitivity is a tunable parameter with quantified consequences for learning, convergence, and generalization. 

## 1.2 Related Work 

We summarize the most relevant related work; an extended version is in Appendix A. 

RLHF. Reinforcement learning from human feedback aligns language models with human preferences via a learned scalar reward model optimized against by PPO (Christiano et al., 2017a; Schulman et al., 2017; Ziegler et al., 2020), with reward hacking and the limits of scalar rewards (Swamy et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2025) as known weaknesses. DPO (Rafailov et al., 2023) sidesteps reward modeling by reparameterizing the optimal policy directly in terms of preferences, and GRPO (Shao et al., 2024) discards the value network in favor of group-relative advantage estimation. Closest to our work, Sabbaghi et al. (2026) extends GRPO with an entropic risk objective over a KL-bounded policy neighborhood, but remains single-player and does not engage with the game-theoretic structure of preference optimization. We refer to the appendix of Zhou et al. (2025) for an extensive discussion of past work in RLHF. 

Game-theoretic preference learning. A growing line of work recasts alignment as a two-player game over policies, using pairwise preferences directly as the payoff. Azar et al. (2024) introduced the IPO loss to optimize pairwise preference probabilities without reward modeling or Bradley-Terry assumptions, and Calandriello et al. (2024a); Munos et al. (2024) formalized the two-player constant-sum framing with self-play algorithms (Nash-MD, IPO-MD) targeting the quantal response equilibrium. Subsequent work has refined the algorithmic side—MPO (Wang et al., 2025), MTPO (Shani et al., 2024), INPO (Zhang et al., 2024), and extragradient-based methods (Zhou et al., 2025)—but all target the same expected pairwise payoff and remain blind to the distribution of preference outcomes. This work addresses that gap, introducing risk-sensitive preference games in which players optimize convex risk measures rather than expectations. 

# 2 Risk-Sensitive Preference Game Preliminaries 

Let X , Y denote a finite set of prompts and responses, respectively. A policy is a probability distribution 

π ∈ ∆( Y). Fix a reference policy πref ∈ ∆◦(Y), where ∆ ◦(Y) denotes the relative interior, and a reference distribution μ ∈ ∆( Y) over opponents. To simplify notation we often treat the |X | = 1 case; all results extend to |X | > 1 by prompt conditioning. 3The NLHF framework (Munos et al., 2024) formulates preference-based fine-tuning as a two-player constant-sum matrix game. It assumes access to preference model P : Y × Y → [0 , 1] mapping pairs of completions to preference probabilities, which are collected into matrix P = [ P(y ≻ y′)] (y,y ′). Critically, since P outputs probabilities, P + P ⊤ = 11 ⊤. In places where clear from context and notationally conve-nient, we conflate P and P. If both players choose policies π1, π 2 ∈ ∆( Y), then player 1’s payoff against player 2 is 

V (π1, π 2) = Ey1∼π1,y 2∼π2 [P(y1 ≻ y2)] = π⊤ 

> 1

P π 2

and 

Vβ (π1, π 2) = π⊤ 

> 1

P π 2 − β KL( π1 ∥ πref ) + β KL( π2 ∥ πref ). (1) The KL-regularized game admits a unique QRE π⋆β , characterized by the fixed-point condition over logits θ,where π ∝ exp( θ): 

θ⋆β = θref + Pπ⋆β /β. (2) Note that the equilibrium logits equal the reference logits plus a term that is linear in the opponent’s policy through the operator P/β . This is the fixed point every NLHF algorithm is chasing. The form of θ⋆β relies on 

both the constant-sum structure P + P ⊤ = 11 ⊤ and the KL-regularization in (1). We provide an overview of related game-theoretic algorithms in Appendix C. 

## 2.1 Risk-Sensitive Preference Games 

We now introduce risk into the NLHF framework. Replacing the expected pairwise payoff with a risk functional yields a risk-adjusted preference operator and shifts the solution concept to the risk-sensitive quantal response equilibrium (RQRE) (Gonzales et al., 2026; Mazumdar et al., 2025). This formulation lets the player express sensitivity to the variability of preference outcomes rather than only their mean, addressing the tail-behavior limitations of expectation-based alignment discussed in Section 1. To formalize this, we draw on the class of convex risk measures studied extensively in mathematical finance F¨ ollmer and Schied (2002). 

Definition 1 (Convex risk measure) . A risk functional R : L∞(Ω , F, P) → R is a convex risk measure if it satisfies the following properties: a. Convexity: For all X, Y ∈ L∞ and λ ∈ [0 , 1], R(λX + (1 − λ)Y ) ≤ λR(X) + (1 − λ)R(Y ). b. Monotonicity: For all X, Y ∈ L∞ such that X ≤ Y , R(X) ≥ R (Y ). c. Translation invariance: For all X ∈ L∞ and c ∈ R, R(X + c) = R(X) + c.

The risk-adjusted preference operator & RQRE. Define the risk-adjusted preference operator 

(PR μ)y := R[P(y,y ′′ ) | y′′ ∼ μ], (3) which replaces the expected win-rate of y against y′′ ∼ μ with its risk-adjusted analog. Each player i ∈ { 1, 2}

then optimizes a risk-adjusted value 

Vβ, R(π1, π 2) = π⊤ 

> i

Pi

> R

π−i − β KL( πi∥πref ) + β KL( π−i∥πref ),

where Pi 

> R

is player i’s risk-adjusted preference operator. A risk-adjusted equilibrium (θ⋆ 

> 1

, θ ⋆ 

> 2

) satisfies 

θ⋆ 

> 1

= θref + P1 

> R

πθ⋆ 

> 2

/β, θ⋆ 

> 2

= θref + P2 

> R

πθ⋆ 

> 1

/β. (4) Taking R ≡ E recovers the NLHF game (1) and its QRE fixed point as a special case of (4). 4Choice of Loss. Before introducing the risk framework, we comment on the choice of loss function. First, the risk framework we develop is not specific to any one preference loss. The same construction applies to the standard family of preference-tuning objectives i.e., IPO, DPO, GRPO, KTO, and others (Calandriello et al., 2024b; Ethayarajh et al., 2024; Rafailov et al., 2023; Shao et al., 2024), by replacing the expectation in their respective preference terms with R. We develop these variants in Appendix E. Here, we focus on IPO Azar et al. (2024) for two reasons. It is the natural choice for game-theoretic analysis: its gradient is a preconditioned residual of the QRE fixed-point equation, and the opponent distribution μ enters distinctly from the sampling distribution ρ, allowing us to directly add risk over the opponent while reaping the rewards of preconditioning. Second, existing game-theoretic algorithms (Nash-MD (Munos et al., 2024), IPO-MD (Calandriello et al., 2024b), MPO (Wang et al., 2025), EGPO (Zhou et al., 2025)) are formulated in the IPO framework, thereby enabling direct comparison theoretically and empirically. 

Risk-Adjusted Loss. Write R = ( RX , Rρ, RW , Rμ) where X is the prompt space, ρ is the response sampling distribution, W broadly captures stochasticity in groups (e.g., annotators, safety, harm, etc.), and 

μ is the opponent distribution. The full risk-adjusted IPO loss is 

LR

> IPO

(θ; ρ, μ ) = Ro

"

log πθ (y | x)πref (y′ | x)

πθ (y′ | x)πref (y | x) − 1

β

 (PRμ, W μ)y|x − (PRμ, W μ)y′|x)2#

(5) where Ro ≡ R X 

> x∼ρX

◦ R ρ

> (y,y ′)∼ρ|x

, and the inner risk-adjusted preference operator is (PRμ, W μ)xy = RW

> w|x

h

Rμy′′ ∼μ[P(y ≻ y′′ | x, w )] 

i

.

Setting any component of R to E recovers the risk-neutral case, and setting all four to E recovers the standard, risk-neutral IPO loss (Calandriello et al., 2024b; Munos et al., 2024). The two inner risks RW , Rμ

enter the preference operator P thereby modifying the equilibrium (4). The other two risks RX , Rρ leave the per-prompt fixed point unchanged and act on the training dynamics. We focus on Rμ, the only choice that alters the game-theoretic content. The remaining three choices of risk and the composition rules for applying multiple risks are formalized in Appendix D. To simplify presentation, we instantiate (5) with risk only over the opponent, and write R := Rμ and 

PR := PRμ for the rest of the main body; the appendix treats the more general case. The resulting risk-adjusted IPO loss is 

LR

> IPO

(θ; ρ, μ ) = E(y,y ′)∼ρ

"

log πθ (y)πref (y′)

πθ (y′)πref (y) − 1

β (( PR μ)y − (PR μ)y′ )) 

2#

. (6) A direct calculation gives the gradient 

∇θ LR

> IPO

(θ; ρ, μ ) = 2 Σ( ρ)( θ − θref − P Rμ/β ),

where Σ( ρ) := E(y,y ′)∼ρ[( 1y − 1y′ )( 1y − 1y′ )⊤] is the response-pair preconditioner. The operator PR is generally nonlinear in μ, and the following examines its structural effect on the game. 

## 2.2 Convex risk preserves the constant-sum structure 

The risk-neutral analysis of NLHF relies on the constant-sum identity P + P ⊤ = 11 ⊤ to collapse the coupled fixed-point equations (4) into a single equilibrium expression θ⋆β = θref + Pπ⋆β /β . Under nonlinear risk transformations, this structure no longer holds at the certainty equivalence level. 

Example 1 (Certainty-equivalent asymmetry) . Consider X ∈ { 0, 1} with P(X = 1) = P(X = 0) = 12 ,so X + ( −X) = 0. At the certainty-equivalent level, risk transformations break this structure. For any 

α ∈ (0 , 1), CVaR satisfies CVaR α(X) = 0, and CVaR α(−X) = −1, so CVaR α(X) + CVaR α(−X)̸ = 0. Despite this shortcoming, when R is translation-invariant, the identity R(1 − X) = 1 + R(−X) ensures that constant-sum structure is preserved at the level of risk-adjusted payoff operators. 5Lemma 1 (Operator-level constant-sum) . Let P ∈ R|Y|×|Y| satisfy P + P ⊤ = 11 ⊤. Let R be translation invariant, i.e., R(X + c) = R(X) + c for all constants c ∈ R. For μ ∈ ∆( Y), define the risk-adjusted payoff operators ( P1

> R

μ)a := R(Pa,Y ′ ), and ( P2

> R

μ)a := R(−P Y ′,a ), with Y ′ ∼ μ. Then, for every μ ∈ ∆( Y), we have 

P1

> R

μ = 1 + P2

> R

μ.In general, iterative algorithms for games will maintain iterates for both players, an undesirable property when iterates are LLMs parametrized by billions of parameters. This lemma enables us to prove that self-play is sufficient to find an equilibrium to the RSPG. To see this, consider algorithms targeting the single-player risk-adjusted operator 

FR(θ) := FR(θ; πθ ) = β(θ − θref ) − P R πθ , (7) which is the residual of player 1’s fixed point equation if the opponent is set to be player 1’s policy. 

Theorem 1. Let P + P ⊤ = 11 ⊤ and let R be a convex risk measure. In the regime β ∈ (0 , ∞), the unique Nash equilibrium ( π⋆θ1 , π ⋆θ2 ) of the RSPG is a symmetric (namely, π⋆ := π⋆θ1 = π⋆θ2 ) and solves the fixed-point equation θ⋆ = θref + PR πθ⋆ /β . Moreover, θ⋆ 

> 1

= θ⋆ 

> 2

+ c1 for some c ∈ R.Thus, translation invariance preserves the efficiency of algorithms which only update a single policy, meaning the robustness to tail behavior inherent to risk measures comes at no structural cost. When the conditions of Theorem 1 are violated—e.g., under asymmetric risk measures or heterogeneous opponents—the two-player formulation must be retained; see Appendix F. Monotonicity of the operator FR determines the rate of convergence for many algorithms. In the symmet-ric self-play setting, monotonicity is determined by displacements within the tangent space T sym = {(ξ, ξ ) : 

ξ ∈ 1⊥} of the diagonal constraint set, where it reduces to a single-player condition: 

⟨FR(θ1)−FR(θ2), π θ1 − πθ2 ⟩ = β⟨θ1 − θ2, π θ1 − πθ2 ⟩ − ⟨P Rπθ1 − P Rπθ2 , π θ1 − πθ2 ⟩

= β KL( πθ1 ∥πθ2 ) + KL( πθ2 ∥πθ1 ) − (πθ1 − πθ2 )⊤JR(¯ π)( πθ1 − πθ2 ),

where JR(π) := 12 (JR +J⊤R )( π)− 12 11 ⊤ is the distortion matrix, ¯ π is a policy on the line segment between πθ1

and πθ2 , and JR(π) := ∇μPR(μ)|μ=π is the Jacobian. The first term is bounded below by strong convexity of the log partition function; the second is controlled by the worst-case risk-distortion eigenvalue restricted to T sym .

Theorem 2 (Informal) . Define the worst-case risk-distortion eigenvalue on the symmetric tangent space 

λR := sup ¯π∈∆( Y) sup { 12 ξ⊤ JR(¯ π) + JR(¯ π)⊤ ξ| ξ ∈ 1⊥, ∥ξ∥2 = 1 }. Suppose λR ≤ β/ 2. Then FR is μR-strongly monotone on T sym with μR = β − 2λR, and extragradient converges to the unique risk-adjusted equilibrium of the RSPG with optimization error rate O((1 − ημ R)T ). The formal statement for the symmetric self-play result is provided in Appendix F.4, where Lemma 5 shows that this single-player form of λR is what the joint-game definition reduces to under symmetric self-play. The more general version for the full joint pseudogradient is in the preceding Appendix F.3, and the full stochastic bounds are given in the sequel. 

# 3 Learning in Risk-Sensitive Preference Games 

We now prove efficient convergence of stochastic self-play algorithms applied to the RSPG. The biggest chal-lenge is that estimators of risk operators are generally not unbiased . We introduce a novel Stackelberg game framework to systematically reduce that bias at no-extra cost. Finally, we show generalization guarantees, not afforded in the risk-neutral regime. 

Risk Estimators. The results require understanding the statistical structure of risk. Recall FR(θ) = 

β(θ − θref ) − P Rπθ , with PR(π)y := RY ′′ ∼π [P(y ≻ Y ′′ )]. Let bPR,m (π)y denote the sample-based estimator of PR(π)y using m i.i.d. samples Y ′′  

> 1

, . . . , Y ′′  

> m

∼ π (the same samples shared across components y). With 

bm(θ) := E bFR,m (θ) − FR(θ) and ζm(θ) := bFR,m (θ) − E bFR,m (θ),

bFR,m (θ) := β(θ − θref ) − bPR,m (πθ ) = FR(θ) + bm(θ) + ζm(θ). (8) 6Here bm(θ) is deterministic given θ and E[ζm(θ)|θ] = 0. By construction bm(θ) = PR(πθ )) − E[ bPR,m (πθ )] and ζm(θ) = E[ bPR,m (πθ )] − bPR,m (πθ ). The convergence theorems in the sequel (and Appendix H) rely on uniform bias and variance bounds. 

Assumption 1 (bias and variance) . There exist constants Bm, V m > 0 decreasing in m such that ∥bm(θ)∥2 ≤

Bm and E ∥ζm(θ)∥22 ≤ Vm for all θ ∈ θref + W.In Appendix G we establish that the risk measures such as CVaR via the Rockafellar-Uryasev transform and the class of the common form R[Z] = h(Eμ(g(Z))) for smooth scalar h and bounded statistic g (e.g., entropic risk) admit bias and variance bounds (at most) Bm, V m = O(1 /m ). 

## 3.1 Iteration Complexity of Biased Extra-Gradient Preference Learning 

Stochastic extragradient on a biased operator is well-studied Juditsky et al. (2011): under strong mono-tonicity it contracts geometrically to a neighborhood of the optimum whose radius is set by the bias and variance of the oracle. Specializing to the risk-adjusted FR with the plug-in estimator bFm, in each round, the stochastic extragradient method Korpelevich (1976) takes two steps: 

θτ −1/2 ← proj K(θτ −1 − η Σ( ρ) bF τm, 1),θτ ← proj K(θτ −1 − η Σ( ρ) bF τm, 2), (9) where bF τm, 1(θτ −1) and F τm, 2(θτ −1/2) are estimated via a batches of size m at θτ −1 and θτ −1/2, respectively. Under Assumption 1, the Σ( ρ)-norm bias and variance relate to the Euclidean-norm constants by 

eBm := sup 

> θ

∥ E[ ˆFm(θ)] − FR(θ)∥Σ( ρ) ≤ √σmax Bm and eVm := E ∥ ˆFm(θ) − E[ ˆFm(θ)] ∥2Σ( ρ) ≤ σmax Vm,

where σmax := ∥Σ( ρ)∥op is the largest eigenvalue of the preconditioner. Analysis yields three error terms: ( i)deterministic linear decay O((1 − ημ R)T ) from the contraction; ( ii ) a persistent bias floor Θ(1 /(μRm)), the cost of plug-in risk estimation, which does not vanish in T or η; ( iii ) a standard variance floor Θ( η/ (μRm)) that shrinks with the step size. The following proposition shows the error bound. 

Proposition 1 (Informal) . Suppose that we are in the strongly monotone regime, μR ≥ β − 2λR > 0, the map μ ∈ ∆( Y) 7 → P R(μ) ∈ R|Y| is LR Lipschitz continuous, and that Assumption 1 holds. Set Ω := sup θ,θ ′∈K ∥θ − θ′∥Σ( ρ)+ is the Σ( ρ)+-diameter of K. Run stochastic extra-gradient on the RSPG with step size η ≤ min { 14μR , 1√6 ℓR

}. For any T ≥ 1 and m ≥ 1, the estimate holds: 

∥θT − θ⋆∥2Σ( ρ)+ ≤ (1 − ημ R)T ∥θ0 − θ⋆∥2Σ( ρ)+ + 4 Ω eBm/μ R + 6 η ( eB2 

> m

+ eVm)/μ R.

This proposition is proved in Appendix H. Specifically, we show biased stochastic extragradient achieves 

O(1 /√t) + O( eBm) averaged-iterate convergence in the merely-monotone regime (Theorem 11) and last-iterate contraction at rate O((1 − γ eμ)t) to a neighborhood of size O( eBm/eμ) in the strongly monotone regime (Theorem 12), where eμ = μRσmin and eBm = O(1 /m ) is the oracle bias. The bias term is the binding constraint in the practically relevant regime: samples are expensive, m is constrained by per-iteration compute, and no amount of further iteration drives this floor down. 

Mirror Descent counterpart. For completeness, in Appendix H.10 we record the analogous convergence guarantees for stochastic projected mirror descent on the IPO gradient flow with a biased stochastic oracle, in both the monotone and strongly monotone settings. The mirror descent bounds have the same structure as their extra-gradient counterparts; namely, O(1 /T ) averaged-iterate gap in the monotone case (Corollary 5) and linear contraction with bias floor O(Ω Bm/eμ) in the strongly monotone case (Corollary 7). The proofs are also essentially specializations of the extra-gradient analysis to the single-oracle-call setting. The one structural difference is that MD picks up an additional LGΩ2γ Lipschitz continuity term that extra-gradient cancels exactly via the inner-step distance ∥wτ − rτ −1∥2 in its two-call descent identity; this is the technical price of dropping extrapolation. We include the mirror descent corollaries for posterity and to make the 7b(θt)         

> ξ0
> ξt
> ξT
> follower (fast)
> θ0θ1
> θt
> θt+1
> θ⋆
> Rleader (slow)
> —Leader: slow, ητ
> • • • Follower: fast, γτ≫ητ
> - -bias target b(θ)

Figure 2: The bias tracker ξt is shown tracking the true bias bm(θt) on a faster timescale than the leader’s update θt—i.e., the IPO policy parameter. extragradient versus mirror descent comparison precise, and because we also implement mirror descent in our experiments—practically speaking, its easier since it requires a single update in each iteration versus two. Our general recommended algorithm however remains stochastic extra-gradient: the extrapolation step costs one additional oracle call per iteration but buys cycling correction, robustness when the estimated game operator fails to be strongly monotone, and a cleaner Lipschitz continuity handling that the mirror descent analysis lacks. 

## 3.2 Stackelberg Game for Fast Two Time-scale Bias Tracking 

The previous section showed that stochastic extragradient on the risk-adjusted operator FR contracts geo-metrically to a neighborhood of θ⋆ 

> R

whose radius is governed by the oracle bias eBm = O(1 /m ) (Proposition 1). Indeed, the bias floor is irreducible without further structure on the oracle: under constant step sizes, no amount of additional iteration removes it. We show the bias floor can be removed essentially for free, by augmenting extragradient with a fast-timescale bias tracker. The persistent O(1 /m ) floor collapses to a residual of order O(1 /m 2)—the same order as the variance floor of an unbiased oracle—and exactly zero for CVaR. 

3.2.1 Stackelberg structure and equilibrium 

We introduce a bias estimator ξ ∈ Rd as a second player and cast the joint dynamics as a Stackelberg game that has a unique equilibrium. This naturally leads to two-timescale dynamics Fiez et al. (2020). The leader 

optimizes the risk-adjusted policy using the debiased gradient bFm − ξ; the follower tracks the leader’s bias. The leader’s cost is the risk-adjusted IPO objective, corrected by the follower’s bias estimate: Φleader (θ; ξ) := LR

> IPO

(θ; ρ, sg[ πθ ]) − ⟨ ξ, θ ⟩,

so that ∇θ Φleader = ∇L R 

> IPO

− ξ is exactly the debiased gradient. The follower’s cost is the quadratic tracking objective Φfollower (ξ; θ) := 12 ∥ξ − bm(θ)∥22,

where bm(θ) := E[ bFm(θ)] − FR(θ) is the oracle’s population bias at θ. Since Φ follower is strongly convex in ξ,the follower’s best-response is single-valued: ξ⋆(θ) = bm(θ) for every θ.A Stackelberg equilibrium of this game is a pair ( θ†, ξ †) at which the follower best-responds to the leader and the leader is stationary against that best-response: ξ† = bm(θ†) and θ† is a stationary point of Φ leader (·; ξ†) on K. Substituting the follower’s best-response into the leader’s first-order condition and using E[ bFm(θ)] = FR(θ) + bm(θ) collapses the leader’s stationarity to FR(θ†) ∈ 1⊥, i.e., precisely the risk-adjusted equilibrium condition for the outer game. The Stackelberg equilibrium is therefore (θ†, ξ †) =  θ⋆

> R

, b m(θ⋆

> R

),

the risk-adjusted equilibrium paired with the perfect bias estimate at that equilibrium. 8Existence and uniqueness. In the monotone regime ( μR ≥ 0, i.e., λR ≤ β/ 2), FR is monotone on K

and a Stackelberg equilibrium exists. When μR > 0 (the strongly monotone regime), FR has a unique zero θ⋆ 

> R

and the equilibrium is unique. The follower’s contribution to uniqueness is automatic: its cost is quadratic in ξ, so the best-response curve ξ⋆(θ) = bm(θ) is single-valued regardless of the regime; uniqueness of the Stackelberg equilibrium is therefore inherited entirely from uniqueness of the leader’s risk-adjusted equilibrium. What remains is to design an algorithm that converges to this equilibrium. 

3.2.2 Two-timescale algorithm for finding Stackelberg equilibrium 

The goal here is to design a two timescale algorithm wherein the leader runs extragradient on the debiased gradient at slow timescale ητ , the follower performs Robbins-Monro updates toward bm(θτ ) at fast timescale 

γτ , and the timescale separation ητ ≪ γτ ensures the follower asymptotically tracks the best-response curve. This will give equilibrium convergence. To that end, let bm(θ) := E[ bFm(θ)] − FR(θ) be the oracle’s population-level bias and bbm a sample-based estimator. Introduce a tracker ξ ∈ Rd with target ξ⋆(θ) = bm(θ). The composite system is a Stackelberg game: the leader is risk-adjusted self-play on θ, using the debiased gradient bFm − ξ; the follower is ξ,best-responding to the leader’s current θ. The Stackelberg equilibrium is ( θ⋆

> R

, b m(θ⋆

> R

)): i.e., the unique risk-adjusted Nash paired with the perfect bias estimate at that Nash. For the equilibrium analysis to translate into convergence the follower runs on a faster timescale: ητ ≪ γτ . The bias estimator uses the same batch already drawn for bFm, so tracking costs no additional samples .

Algorithm 1 TT-EG : Two-timescale extragradient with bias tracking  

> 1:

Input: θ0 ∈ D; slow steps {ηt}, fast steps {γt}; batch size m. Initialize ξ0 ← 0.  

> 2:

for τ = 1 , . . . , T do  

> 3:

Update (θτ , θ τ −1/2) ← ExtraGrad (ητ ), via (9)  

> 4:

Update ξτ ← (1 − γτ )ξτ −1 + γτ bb(τ, 2)  

> m
> 5:

return θT

For the canonical delta-method estimator bbm(θ) = h′′ (bqm)dVar m(g)/(2 m) on risks of the form h(Eμ[g(Z)]) (entropic, smooth distortion), the residual bias is Rm = O(1 /m 2) and variance V bm = O(1 /m 3). For CVaR-RU, Rm = V bm = 0 identically. 

Theorem 3 (Informal) . Suppose FR is eμ-strongly monotone and Lipschitz. Assume the gradient oracle has bounded bias ∥ E[ bFm(θ)] − FR(θ)∥ ≤ eBm and bounded variance E ∥ bFm(θ) − E bFm(θ)∥2 ≤ eVm, and the bias estimator bbm has residual bias ∥ E bbm(θ) − bm(θ)∥ ≤ Rm, bounded variance E ∥bbm(θ) − E bbm(θ)∥2 ≤ V bm, and Lipschitz dependence on θ. Then Algorithm 1 satisfies: 

i. Non-asymptotic. For appropriate η, γ , the iterates contract geometrically to a steady-state floor of order O(η/γ + Rm + pγV bm + η eVm). Tuning η = O(γ/m ) collapses this to O(1 /m 3/2)—matching the variance scale. 

ii. Asymptotic. With ηt → 0, ηt/γ t → 0, and P 

> t

ηt = ∞, lim sup T →∞ E ∥θT − θ⋆

> R

∥2 = O(Rm). The bias floor is O(1 /m 2) for delta-method estimators and zero for CVaR-RU. The merely-monotone case (Theorem 16) gives the analogous averaged-iterate gap bound with the same 

O(1 /m 3/2) floor. Precise statements, the Stackelberg derivation, and the horizon-tuned O(T −1/3) rate are in Appendix I. The un-tracked algorithm has a bias term eB2 

> m

≍ 1/(λm )2 and a slow-variance term η eVm ≍ η/m .The bias dominates when m ≲ 1/(λ2η), and below this threshold the un-tracked algorithm wastes a full power of 1 /m on a floor that TT-EG removes; above it, both algorithms are variance-limited and agree. In preference optimization, m is constrained by memory and rollout cost—tens to low hundreds of samples per gradient— and the bias constants for entropic risk are non-trivial. Practical training sits squarely in the bias-dominated regime. Figure 3 is a numerical illustration (detailed in Appendix I.2) that confirms this on a Bradley-Terry game with entropic distortion: at m = 15, vanilla extragradient plateaus at ∼ 10 −4 while TT-EG reaches 

∼ 2 × 10 −6 (a 50 × improvement). 9Figure 3: Asymptotic squared-error floor vs. batch size m, in two regimes. Floor measured as the mean of the last 500 Polyak-averaged iterates. Left: bias-dominated regime ( m ∈ [15 , 130]). Vanilla extragradient floor scales roughly ∝ 1/m 2 (matching the Θ( eB2

> m

) prediction), descending more than two orders of magnitude across the range. TT-EG floor is roughly flat near ∼ 10 −6, giving a ∼ 100 × reduction at m = 15 (the small-m end where vanilla is most bias-dominated) and approaching parity by m = 130. 

Right: variance-dominated regime ( m ∈ [150 , 500]). Both floors descend only modestly across this range and converge toward a common value around ∼ 1.5 × 10 −7, dominated by the slow-variance term Θ( η eVm) in (134); the bias contribution is negligible here. At the largest m TT-EG sits marginally above vanilla, reflecting the small noise-filter cost Θ( pγV bm) paid to maintain the tracker even when the bias being tracked is already small. Dashed line: oracle baseline at ∼ 4 × 10 −8.

Mirror Descent with two-timescale debiasing. The two-timescale debiasing construction transfers cleanly to mirror descent: in Appendix I.4 we give the mirror descent analogues of Theorems 13 and 14. 

Theorem 4 (Informal) . Suppose FR is eμ-strongly monotone and Lipschitz. Assume the gradient oracle has bounded bias ∥ E[ bFm(θ)] − FR(θ)∥ ≤ eBm and bounded variance E ∥ bFm(θ) − E bFm(θ)∥2 ≤ eVm, and the bias estimator bbm has residual bias ∥ E bbm(θ) − bm(θ)∥ ≤ Rm, bounded variance E ∥bbm(θ) − E bbm(θ)∥2 ≤ V bm, and Lipschitz dependence on θ. Then the single-call mirror descent analogue of Algorithm 1 satisfies: 

i. Non-asymptotic. For appropriate η, γ , the iterates contract geometrically to a steady-state floor of order O(η/γ + Rm + pγV bm + η eVm + L2

> G

η), with the final term the structural cost of omitting extrapolation. Tuning η = O(γ/m ) collapses this to O(1 /m 3/2)—matching the extra-gradient rate up to the Lipschitz floor. 

ii. Asymptotic. With ηt → 0, ηt/γ t → 0, and P 

> t

ηt = ∞, lim sup T →∞ E ∥θT − θ⋆

> R

∥2 = O(Rm). The Lipschitz floor vanishes automatically under the decaying schedule, so the asymptotic bound matches extra-gradient exactly ; the bias floor is O(1 /m 2) for delta-method estimators and zero for CVaR-RU. Theorem 4 should be read alongside its extra-gradient counterpart. The asymptotic vanishing-bias result is in fact identical up to constants: under decaying step sizes with ηt/γ t → 0, the MD iterates also satisfy lim sup T E ∥θT − θ⋆∥2Σ+ ≤ 4√3 Ω √σmax Rm/eμ (Corollary 9), with the persistent O(1 /m ) bias floor of the un-tracked algorithm replaced by an asymptotic-in-T floor at the Rm-residual scale. In the constant-step regime, the four-term floor of extra-gradient (timescale gap, residual bias, noise filter, slow variance) becomes a five-term floor for mirror descent, with the additional term being the same LGΩ2η Lipschitz floor noted in Appendix H.10 above. As before, the mirror descent proofs are straightforward specializations of the extra-gradient analysis: indeed, the scalar two-timescale unrolling lemma (Lemma 14), the weighted-average analysis (Lemmas 15–17), and the tracking-error recurrence apply verbatim, modulo a smaller drift constant 

CMD drift = Lbσmax G (versus 3 Lbσmax G for extra-gradient) reflecting mirror descent’s single-call structure. We include these results for posterity and parallelism with our extra-gradient theory, but emphasize that the recommended deployment remains two-timescale extra-gradient: the asymptotic improvement is the same, the finite-horizon constants are tighter, the constant-step regime carries one fewer floor term, and importantly extra-gradient remains viable even if the game slides into the merely-monotone regime. 10 3.3 Algorithmic Stability, Generalization, & Offline Sample Complexity 

To understand the relationship between optimization and offline guarantees, the population performance is decomposed into optimization and generalization errors: for S ∼ D n an offline dataset, 

ES [R(ˆθT (S)) − R (θ⋆)] ≤ ES [RS (ˆθT (S)) − R S (θ⋆)] 

| {z }

> optimization error

+ ES [R(ˆθT (S)) − R S (ˆθT (S))] 

| {z }

> generalization error

,

where R, RS denote the population and empirical objectives, respectively. Stochastic extra-gradient analysis (Proposition 1 or Theorem 3) controls the optimization error. Algorithmic stability, our interest here, controls the generalization error. 

## 3.4 Stability & Generalization 

To start, we show the risk adjusted equilibrium is Lipschitz-continuous in in the risk-adjusted preference operator PR—something not in general true for the Nash equilibrium corresponding to the risk-neutral preference game without KL regularization since Nash equilibria are non-unique and have no guarantees of smoothness. Regularization induces a QRE, which is known to be unique for normal form games with β > 0(McKelvey and Palfrey, 1995). Here we show that risk provides the needed regularity to prove generalization and robustness bounds. 

Theorem 5 (Structural stability of the risk-adjusted equilibrium under operator perturbation) . Let P, P′ be two preference operators with corresponding risk-adjusted operators PR, P′R and risk-distortion eigenvalues ¯λR(P), ¯λR(P′) ≤ β/ 2 − ϵ for some ϵ > 0. Suppose we are in the strongly monotone regime with the strong-monotonicity moduli 

μR := β − 2¯λR(P), μ′R := β − 2¯λR(P′),

of PR and P′R, respectively, both bounded below by 2 ϵ. Let θ⋆ = θ⋆

> R

(P) and θ′⋆ = θ⋆

> R

(P′) be the corre-sponding risk-adjusted equilibria. Then the estimate holds: 

θ⋆ − θ′⋆ ≤ 1min {μR, μ ′R} (PR − P ′R) πθ′⋆ . (10) In particular, using the operator norm ∥ · ∥ op acting on ∆( Y) ⊆ R|Y| , the estimate reduces to θ⋆ − θ′⋆ ≤

PR − P ′R op /(min {μR, μ ′R}). The following proposition is a direct consequence of the above theorem; both are proved in Appendix J. 

Proposition 2. Let π⋆ and π′⋆ be the RQRE induced by PR and P′R, respectively, and suppose we are in the strongly monotone regime. Then the estimate holds: KL( π⋆∥π′⋆) ≤ ∥P R − P ′R∥2

> ∞

min {μR, μ ′R}2 .

Specialized to datasets S, S (i) differing in one sample, this parametric stability yields algorithmic stability of the risk-adjusted equilibrium map. 

Theorem 6 (Informal) . Suppose the preference model is uniformly stable with parameter ζ—i.e., ∥P R,S −PR,S (i) ∥∞ ≤ ζ. Then the risk-adjusted equilibrium map S 7 → π⋆S is βn = O(|Y| 1/2ζ/μ R) uniformly stable, and the generalization gap is 

ES LR

> IPO

(π⋆S ) − ES bLR

> IPO

(π⋆S ) ≤ βn,

in expectation, sharpening to eO(βn) + O(plog(1 /δ )/n ) with probability 1 − δ.The high-probability bound uses the moment-based concentration of Bousquet et al. (2020), which closes the gap left by McDiarmid’s inequality in the slow-stability regime —i.e., when the stability parameter ζ

decays no faster than O(n−1/2). This regime is the one relevant for preference models using deep architec-tures: unlike convex losses (e.g., regularized empirical risk minimization, kernel methods) where ζ = O(1 /n )11 Figure 4: Cross-play win-rate heatmap on the Random stratum. Each cell reports win-rate of the row policy against the column opponent. Risk-adjusted methods match or exceed risk-neutral baselines on safety and combined win-rates across all opponents, with no cost to preference win-rate. is achievable, modern preference models using deep architectures trained by stochastic gradient methods typically attain only ζ = O(n−1/2) stability (Recht et al., 2015), and it is precisely in this regime that McDiarmid’s inequality fails to deliver a nontrivial high-probability bound. Concretely, when ζ = O(n−1/2)the moment method gives an eO(n−1/2) generalization rate; for the more favorable case of stable preference models with ζ = O(1 /n ), the rate sharpens to eO(1 /n ). Full proofs—including the structural-stability bound KL( π⋆∥π′⋆) ≤ O (ζ2/μ 2

> R

) (Theorem 5), algorithmic-stability conversion (Theorem 17), in-expectation bound (Theorem 18), and high-probability bound (Corollary 14)—are in Appendix J. 

## 3.5 Offline sample complexity 

Optimization yields convergence to an empirical equilibrium; stability controls the gap to the population. Combining the two gives a fast eO(1 /n ) guarantee on the distance to the population risk-adjusted equi-librium π⋆

> R

. Extending the recent risk-neutral result of Zhang et al. (2026) to our setting is non-trivial: a nonlinear risk functional R breaks zero-sum structure, biases our estimators, and amplifies noise in a variance-dependent way—the last of which defeats a H¨ oeffding-based analysis. Strong monotonicity, the stability bound of Theorem 5, and Bernstein concentration together upgrade the rate from eO(1 /√n) to 

eO(1 /n ). 

Theorem 7 (Offline sample complexity) . Consider the strongly monotone regime with μR = β − 2¯λR > 0, and the coherent risk measure admits the dual representation R[Z] = sup q∈Q Eμ[q(Y )Z(Y )], where Q is a convex, closed ambiguity set with uniformly bounded density ratios ∥q∥∞ ≤ MR. Let bπn be the empirical risk-adjusted equilibrium computed from n offline preference samples. With probability at least 1 − δ, the estimate holds: KL( π⋆

> R

∥bπn) ≲ M 2 

> R

log( |Y| /δ )/(μ2

> R

n).

The proof, given in Appendix K, combines bias control, Bernstein concentration that exploits variance to recover the fast rate, and strong-metric stability of the equilibrium under operator perturbation. In the entropic case the bound reduces to KL( π⋆

> R

∥bπn) ≤ K e 4λ log( |Y| /δ )/(μ2

> R

n), making explicit the price and protection of risk via λ and μR. CVaR under the Rockafellar-Uryasev parameterization gives a parallel result with the entropic factor replaced by the polynomial 1 /(1 − α)2 (Theorem 19); empirical strong monotonicity of bPR is itself a statistical event but is inherited from the population condition above an explicit sample threshold (Proposition 10). 

Synthesis with convergence and monotonicity results. To make clear how these results combine together consider the following rationale. Theorem 7 is the offline analog of the online convergence guarantee 12 Figure 5: Mean and CVaR 0.25 combined win-rate across four held-out strata (Random, Conflict, Sev-3, Sev-1), with mean ±, σ across strata in the rightmost column. Risk-adjusted methods dominate on both metrics and remain stable across strata, while risk-neutral baselines degrade on CVaR and show higher variance across strata. Below the first white line are all risk models. for risk-adjusted extra-gradient (Proposition 1) and the two-timescale debiasing result (Theorem 15). All three rely on the same underlying object: the strong-monotonicity modulus μR = β − 2¯λR derived in Theorem 2. In the offline setting, μR governs the sample complexity rate. In the online setting, μR

governs the convergence rate 1 − ημ R of extra-gradient iterates and the bias floor O(Bm/μ R). The condition ¯λR ≤ β/ 2−ε is therefore the single technical assumption that delivers all three: fast convergence in iterations, vanishing bias floor under two-timescale debiasing, and fast statistical rate in offline samples. Conversely, the threshold ¯λR = β/ 2 is a fundamental boundary: it bounds the regime in which strong monotonicity holds, and we expect all three properties to fail simultaneously beyond it. This unified role of μR is the technical content of the “aligned risk reinforces regularization” message: when ∆ R ⪯ 0, μR is strengthened beyond β, and all three guarantees improve simultaneously—faster convergence, smaller bias floor, and faster statistical rate. 

# 4 Experiments 

We empirically evaluate risk-sensitive preference games 1 on safety alignment of LLMs using the PKU-SafeRLHF preference dataset (Ji et al., 2024), which provides paired responses with both helpfulness prefer-ences and per-response harmfulness annotations across three severity levels. The central question is whether risk-adjusted training delivers the robustness predicted by our theory—i.e., improved tail behavior and stable performance across data strata—and whether, surprisingly, this robustness comes at no cost to average-case preference win-rate: robustness without a performance tax . We probe tail behavior through evaluation on held-out severity strata, unseen preference models trained on the same data, and cross-play; significant degra-dation on any of these would be the signature of the reward hacking we wish to avoid. Full experimental details and further results are deferred to Appendix L. 

Setup. All policies are LoRA fine-tuned from a common SFT base (Touvron et al., 2023). We compare risk-neutral NLHF baselines ( EGPO (Zhou et al., 2025) and OIPO (Calandriello et al., 2024b)) against the risk-adjusted IPO (6) instantiated with entropic risk at level τ and CVaR at the α tail. All NLHF methods share hyperparameters. We additionally include two group-DRO variants over PKU unsafe severity strata: plain gDRO , which applies the framework’s group risk RW with weights across strata rather than across opponents, and gDRO-CVaR , which additionally applies CVaR across groups. These variants instantiate the same general framework (5) at a different source of uncertainty, and we include them to demonstrate that the framework is not restricted to opponent risk. We train risk-adjusted models with both extragradient ( EG , 

> 1Code is available at https://github.com/JakeAGonzales/risk-sensitive-preference-games .

13 the algorithm our theory analyzes) and online mirror descent ( OMD , which omits the look-ahead step). Our theoretical guarantees for EG carry over to OMD in the strongly monotone regime, with a slower rate and no analogous guarantee in the merely-monotone case; we include OMD as an easier-to-implement variant whose practical performance still informs us about the impact of strategic risk. Preferences are scored by an LLM judge and harmfulness by the PKU cost model. We report preference, safety, and combined (preferred and 

safer) win-rates over cross-play between all method pairs, with mean and standard deviation across runs. 

## 4.1 Robustness with Performance 

Here we report on both the robustness gains that do not come at a cost in terms of mean performance, and then also robustness across harm categories and response variance. 

Average-case: robustness without a performance tax. Figure 4 reports cross-play win rates on the random stratum. The risk-adjusted variants OMD-Ent (τ =10) and OMD-CVaR (α=.25) match or exceed the risk-neutral OMD baseline on every opponent across all three metrics. On the combined win rate, OMD-Ent 

achieves 82 .2% against the SFT base and 99 .2% against the strongest SFT temperature opponent, with consistent safety gains of 1–3 points over neutral OMD at no cost to preference win rate. The gDRO variants are competitive but sit a few points below the risk-sensitive game methods on every opponent, consistent with their different mechanism: they re-weight training prompts across severity groups rather than acting on the opponent distribution inside the game. 

Robustness across harm categories and response variance. Two further patterns from the appendix sharpen the cross-strata story. First, breaking the Random and Sev-3 strata down by harm category (Fig-ures 24–25, Appendix L) shows that the robustness-ratio advantage of risk-adjusted methods is uniform across the most safety-critical categories: on Sev-3, OMD-Ent and OMD-CVaR achieve the highest robustness ratios on Mental Manipulation, Physical Harm, Privacy Violation, Human Trafficking, Sexual Content, and 

Violence , while SFT and EGPO sit at 0 .06–0 .66 across these same categories. The improvement is not con-centrated in one harm type but holds uniformly across the categories that matter most, which is what one should expect if risk-focusing on tails is genuinely respecting the heterogeneity within them rather than overfitting to a particular failure mode. Second, risk-adjusted methods produce substantially more deterministic outputs: their mean response-level variance is roughly 3–5 × lower than SFT and EGPO across preference, safety, and combined metrics (Figure 18), and lower than the K=8 risk-neutral baselines as well, with OMD-Ent the most consistent. Beyond robustness, this points to a complementary benefit of risk adjustment for LLM alignment: it bakes predictability and reduced sample-to-sample variability into the trained policy—a property of independent value when deploying language models in safety-sensitive settings or when using them as AI judges/evaluators in other tasks (e.g., embodied AI such as fine-tuning VLAs (Chen et al., 2026; Kim et al., 2024)) or training LLMs via semi-supervised or prediction-powered inference Angelopoulos et al. (2023); Chiang et al. (2024); Fisch et al. (2024); Frankel et al. (2026). Full per-category breakdowns and Sev-3 variance results are in Appendix L.6 and L.4. 

## 4.2 Cross-Strata Evaluation 

The harder test is whether a single policy remains strong across strata it was not trained for. We evaluate all models on four evaluation strata that stress different aspects of alignment: Random (uniformly sampled prompts), Conflict (prompts where safety and helpfulness are in tension), Sev-3 (prompts with severity-3 safety violations), and Sev-Low (prompts with low-severity safety concerns). A policy is credited with a win on a given prompt only if it is both preferred by the judge and produces a safer response than the opponent. Win rates are pooled across eight opponents that span a range of response quality: five temperature variants of the SFT base model ( T ∈ { 0.1, 0.5, 1.0, 2.0, 3.0}), ranging from overly conservative to near-degenerate, plus three out-of-family models of varying capacity (Qwen-1.5B, Qwen-7B, SmolLM2). This opponent set tests whether a policy can reliably win against both weak and strong baselines across different model families. 14 Model Random Conflict Sev-3 Sev-Low 

Baselines & Neutral 

SFT Base 2.5±1.6 2.4±1.8 1.9±1.8 2.4±1.7

EGPO † (HF) 4.8±2.5 4.8±2.9 11 .0±3.5 9.1±3.6

IPO k = 1 Neutral 27 .1±12 .3 33 .8±9.7 57 .2±5.7 50 .8±7.0

NMD k = 1 Neutral 22 .9±7.8 28 .0±7.1 52 .5±5.3 39 .2±6.0

EG k = 1 Neutral 27 .9±8.3 32 .4±7.9 54 .9±5.2 41 .2±6.3

Risk-Trained (Entropic / CVaR) 

IPO Entropic τ =5 30 .8±8.5 37 .1±8.6 54 .8±6.3 48 .8±6.3

IPO Entropic τ =10 37 .1±9.5 40 .3±8.9 60 .9±4.8 53 .6±7.1

EG Entropic τ =5 36 .8±10 .9 34 .1±7.0 57 .2±5.5 44 .5±6.7

IPO CVaR α=0 .25 36 .8±9.1 37 .2±8.9 56 .5±5.6 49 .4±8.1

IPO CVaR α=0 .125 30 .8±9.6 34 .2±9.0 56 .8±5.4 48 .6±8.7

Table 1: Deep tail performance on n = 100 samples: CVaR(0.125) of combined win rate (%). Mean win rate on the worst 12.5% of prompts. The advantage of risk-trained objectives grows as we focus deeper into the tail. †Note: EGPO (HF) is the model from Zhou et al. (2025) pulled from hugging face. We retrained this model and that version is EG k = 1 Neutral. 

Why cross-strata consistency matters. Before discussing results, we would be remiss to not comment on the significance of cross strata evaluation. A risk-sensitive objective could in principle achieve strong tail performance by overfitting to a single type of hard prompt—collapsing the heterogeneity of the tail into a narrow failure mode it has learned to handle. The test that rules out both is consistency across strata and metrics simultaneously : a method that genuinely respects the diversity of the tail must perform well not just on the worst quantile of a single distribution under a single risk measure, but on the worst quantiles of qualitatively different slices (ambiguous, conflict, severity-graded) under qualitatively different summaries (CVaR at multiple depths, mean rank, robustness ratio). Consistency across strata is the key evidence that risk-focusing on tails broadly is actually respecting the diversity within those tails, not just optimizing one convenient slice of them. 

Cross-Strata Robustness. Figure 5 reports per stratum CVaR 0.25 scores and mean ranks on the per-prompt combined win-rate distribution across four held-out strata: random prompts, low-severity unsafe prompts, prompts where the preference label conflicts with the safety label, and severity-3 unsafe prompts. 

OMD-Ent (τ =10) achieves the highest CVaR 0.25 score on three of four strata and the lowest mean rank (1 .2 ± 0.4) across them. OMD-CVaR (α=.25) is the second most stable (2 .5 ± 0.5). The risk-neutral OMD baseline, which is competitive on the random stratum, degrades sharply on both severity strata, illustrating precisely the failure mode our framework targets. The gDRO variants show intermediate behavior: they improve on the severity strata relative to the risk neutral baselines, but do not match the stability of the risk-sensitive game methods—further evidence that opponent risk and prompt distribution risk are complementary but distinct mechanisms within the framework. Additional results across strata and metrics are in Appendix L. 

Deep tail performance (Table 1). The gap between risk-trained and neutral models widens substantially in the tail. At CVaR(0.125)—the worst 12.5% of prompts—the improvement grows further: 37.1% vs. 27.1% on Random, a 37% relative gain. Crucially, this widening gap appears across all four strata simultaneously ,not just on the random stratum where the tail is defined: the same risk-trained policy that dominates the deep tail on Random also dominates on Conflict, Sev-3, and Sev-Low. This is the signature of a method that improves performance on the tail as a heterogeneous object rather than on one specific failure mode. 

Robustness ratio (Table 2). The robustness ratio (CVaR/Mean × 100) measures how much a model’s worst-case performance lags its average. A perfectly uniform model would score 100; a model that performs well on easy prompts but catastrophically on hard ones scores low. Risk-trained models consistently achieve higher ratios than their neutral counterparts (69.7% vs. 65.6% average for IPO Entropic τ = 10 vs. IPO k = 1 15 Model Random Conflict Sev-3 Sev-Low Avg                                                                  

> Baselines & Neutral
> SFT Base 18.5 19.6 16.3 18.7 18.3 EGPO †(HF) 23.2 25.1 34.0 31.8 28.5 IPO k= 1 Neutral 55.6 58.9 75.7 72.0 65.6 NMD k= 1 Neutral 48.7 53.1 72.2 63.9 59.5 EG k= 1 Neutral 53.9 56.8 74.0 65.3 62.5
> Risk-Trained (Entropic / CVaR)
> IPO Entropic τ=5 58.1 61.9 74.4 70.5 66.2 IPO Entropic τ=10 61.9 64.4 78.4 74.2 69.7
> EG Entropic τ=5 62.6 57.9 75.7 68.3 66.1 IPO CVaR α=0 .25 62.4 61.0 75.6 71.5 67.6 IPO CVaR α=0 .125 58.5 59.9 75.3 70.6 66.1

Table 2: Robustness ratio on n = 100 samples: CVaR(0.25) / Mean × 100 (%). A ratio of 100 means no degradation from average to tail. Higher = more consistent across prompts. Risk-trained models achieve higher ratios, indicating their average performance better reflects worst-case behavior. †Note: EGPO (HF) is the model from Zhou et al. (2025) pulled from hugging face. We retrained this model and that version is EG k = 1 Neutral.                                       

> Model Random Conflict Sev-3 Sev-Low Avg
> Risk-Trained (Entropic / CVaR)
> IPO Entropic τ=5 +2.1 +3.4 −1.0 −1.7 +0.7 IPO Entropic τ=10 +6.6 +6.4 +3.7 +3.1 +5.0
> EG Entropic τ=5 +6.3 −1.5 +0.5 −4.7 +0.2 IPO CVaR α=0 .25 +6.3 +1.7 +0.4 −0.3 +2.0 IPO CVaR α=0 .125 +2.2 +0.8 −0.4 −1.6 +0.3

Table 3: Improvement in CVaR(0.25) over the IPO k = 1 Neutral baseline (same architecture, mean-risk objective, best performing of the baselines). Evaluation is on n = 100 samples. Positive values indicate better tail performance. Risk-trained objectives consistently improve the tail, with the largest gains on the conflict stratum where safety and preference labels disagree. Neutral) and, more tellingly, this advantage holds on every stratum individually, not only on average. Their headline numbers therefore reflect performance across the full prompt distribution rather than concealing a tail collapse on any one slice. 

Stratum-specific patterns. Performance on the severity strata (Sev-3, Sev-Low) is generally higher and more tightly clustered across models, reflecting that explicit safety violations provide a clearer training signal. The Random and Conflict strata are more discriminating: here, models must navigate ambiguous cases where the optimal response requires balancing competing objectives. Risk-trained models show their largest absolute gains on these harder strata, suggesting that tail-risk objectives are particularly beneficial when the reward landscape is noisy or multi-modal—and these gains hold simultaneously across all four strata, not just on the one that drives the CVaR cutoff. 

Consistency across strata and metrics. The pattern across Tables 1–3 and Figure 5 is that the same risk-trained policies hold their advantage on every cut of the data simultaneously: across four qualita-tively different strata (Random, Conflict, Sev-3, Sev-Low) and across four qualitatively different summaries (CVaR 0.25 , CVaR 0.125 , robustness ratio, mean rank). This joint consistency is what distinguishes genuine tail-respect from narrow specialization. A method that overfit to one type of hard prompt would win on one stratum and lose on others; a method that gamed one risk measure would win on one summary and lose on others. Risk-adjusted methods do neither: they remain top on strata they were never trained for and on metrics that probe different parts of the tail. This is the empirical signature of broadly respecting the 16 heterogeneity of the tail rather than optimizing one convenient projection of it. 

## 4.3 Takeaways 

The empirical picture is unambiguous: risk-adjusted methods are Pareto-dominant. On the random stratum, they match or exceed risk-neutral baselines uniformly across cross-play opponents and metrics. On the harder cross-strata test, the same policies hold the top mean-rank positions across strata they were never explicitly trained on, while the risk-neutral baselines that were competitive on average degrade sharply on the tails—the failure mode our framework targets. The cross-strata picture is the load-bearing evidence that risk-adjusted training improves performance on the tail as a heterogeneous object : rather than overfitting to a single type of hard prompt, risk-sensitive policies remain strong on the worst quantile of qualitatively different slices (ambiguous, conflict, severity-graded) simultaneously. Risk sensitivity buys robustness across data strata—and across the heterogeneity within them—at no significant cost to average-case performance. 

# 5 Conclusion 

This work reframes alignment as learning equilibria over preference distributions rather than expectations, while preserving the structural, computational, and statistical properties that make NLHF tractable. A key technical insight is that translation invariance—shared by every convex risk measure of practical interest— preserves constant-sum structure at the risk-adjusted payoff operator, even when it fails at the certainty-equivalent level. This recovery underwrites a clean equilibrium theory: strong monotonicity, existence and uniqueness, last-iterate self-play convergence, and generalization bounds matching the risk-neutral case up to constants in the degree of risk. A two-timescale Stackelberg correction removes the bias floor that na¨ ıve stochastic estimation of risk would otherwise impose. RSPGs empirically preserve average-case performance, matching or exceeding risk-neutral baselines on every cross-play opponent and metric on the random stratum, and the same policies remain near the top on severity, conflict, and low-severity strata without being explicitly trained on any of them. Risk is a tunable parameter whose consequences for learning, convergence, and generalization are quantified throughout. We identify several promising future directions in Appendix B. The thread connecting these directions is a shift in what alignment research takes to be its primary object. The dominant paradigm optimizes a scalar summary of preferences and treats the structure of the underlying distribution as a nuisance to be averaged away; what we propose is that the distributional features—e.g., variance, tails, heterogeneity, worst-case behavior—should be first-class objects of optimization, with explicit and quantified consequences for learning, convergence, and generalization. The framework here is one realization of that program; we expect the broader question— how to align learning systems to populations of users with explicit guarantees on the long tail —to be a central one for the field. 

Acknowledgments 

JG is supported by an NSF Graduate Research Fellowship under Grant No. DGE-2140004. 

# References 

Anastasios N Angelopoulos, Stephen Bates, Clara Fannjiang, Michael I Jordan, and Tijana Zrnic. Prediction-powered inference. Science , 382(6671):669–674, 2023. Philippe Artzner, Freddy Delbaen, Jean-Marc Eber, and David Heath. Coherent measures of risk. Math-ematical Finance , 9(3):203–228, 1999. doi: https://doi.org/10.1111/1467-9965.00068. URL https: //onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/1467-9965.00068 .Mohammad Gheshlaghi Azar, Zhaohan Daniel Guo, Bilal Piot, Remi Munos, Mark Rowland, Michal Valko, and Daniele Calandriello. A general theoretical paradigm to understand learning from human preferences. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics , pages 4447–4455. PMLR, 2024. 17 Yuntao Bai, Andy Jones, Kamal Ndousse, Amanda Askell, Anna Chen, Nova DasSarma, Dawn Drain, Stanislav Fort, Deep Ganguli, Tom Henighan, Nicholas Joseph, Saurav Kadavath, Jackson Kernion, Tom Conerly, Sheer El-Showk, Nelson Elhage, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Danny Hernandez, Tristan Hume, Scott Johnston, Shauna Kravec, Liane Lovitt, Neel Nanda, Catherine Olsson, Dario Amodei, Tom Brown, Jack Clark, Sam McCandlish, Chris Olah, Ben Mann, and Jared Kaplan. Training a helpful and harmless assistant with reinforcement learning from human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.05862 , 2022. Olivier Bousquet and Andr´ e Elisseeff. Stability and generalization. Journal of machine learning research , 2 (Mar):499–526, 2002. Olivier Bousquet, Yegor Klochkov, and Nikita Zhivotovskiy. Sharper bounds for uniformly stable algorithms. In Conference on Learning Theory , pages 610–626. PMLR, 2020. Ralph Allan Bradley and Milton E. Terry. Rank analysis of incomplete block designs: I. the method of paired comparisons. Biometrika , 39(3/4):324–345, 1952. ISSN 00063444, 14643510. URL http://www. jstor.org/stable/2334029 .Daniele Calandriello, Daniel Guo, Remi Munos, Mark Rowland, Yunhao Tang, Bernardo Avila Pires, Pierre Harvey Richemond, Charline Le Lan, Michal Valko, Tianqi Liu, et al. Human alignment of large language models through online preference optimisation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.08635 , 2024a. Daniele Calandriello, Zhaohan Daniel Guo, Remi Munos, Mark Rowland, Yunhao Tang, Bernardo Avila Pires, Pierre Harvey Richemond, Charline Le Lan, Michal Valko, Tianqi Liu, Rishabh Joshi, Zeyu Zheng, and Bilal Piot. Human alignment of large language models through online preference optimisation. In 

Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning , ICML’24. JMLR.org, 2024b. Shicong Cen, Yuting Wei, and Yuejie Chi. Fast last-iterate convergence of policy optimization in zero-sum Markov games. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.04185 , 2021. Shirui Chen, Cole Harrison, Ying-Chun Lee, Angela Jin Yang, Zhongzheng Ren, Lillian J Ratliff, Jiafei Duan, Dieter Fox, and Ranjay Krishna. TOPReward: Token probabilities as hidden zero-shot rewards for robotics. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.19313 , 2026. Wei-Lin Chiang, Lianmin Zheng, Ying Sheng, Anastasios Nikolas Angelopoulos, Tianle Li, Dacheng Li, Banghua Zhu, Hao Zhang, Michael I Jordan, Joseph E Gonzalez, and Ion Stoica. Chatbot arena: An open platform for evaluating LLMs by human preference. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.04132 , 2024. Paul F. Christiano, Jan Leike, Tom B. Brown, Miljan Martic, Shane Legg, and Dario Amodei. Deep reinforcement learning from human preferences. In Proceedings of the 31st International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , NIPS’17, page 4302–4310, Red Hook, NY, USA, 2017a. Curran Associates Inc. ISBN 9781510860964. Paul F. Christiano, Jan Leike, Tom B. Brown, Miljan Martic, Shane Legg, and Dario Amodei. Deep reinforcement learning from human preferences. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,volume 30, 2017b. Thinh T Doan. Finite-time convergence rates of nonlinear two-time-scale stochastic approximation under markovian noise. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.01627 , 2021. Asen L Dontchev and R Tyrrell Rockafellar. Implicit functions and solution mappings , volume 543. Springer, 2009a. Asen L Dontchev and R Tyrrell Rockafellar. Robinson’s implicit function theorem and its extensions. 

Mathematical Programming , 117(1):129–147, 2009b. Kawin Ethayarajh, Winnie Xu, Niklas Muennighoff, Dan Jurafsky, and Douwe Kiela. Model alignment as prospect theoretic optimization. In Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning ,ICML’24. JMLR.org, 2024. 18 Tanner Fiez, Benjamin Chasnov, and Lillian Ratliff. Implicit learning dynamics in stackelberg games: Equilibria characterization, convergence analysis, and empirical study. In International conference on machine learning , pages 3133–3144. PMLR, 2020. Adam Fisch, Joshua Maynez, R Alex Hofer, Bhuwan Dhingra, Amir Globerson, and William W Cohen. Strat-ified prediction-powered inference for hybrid language model evaluation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.04291 ,2024. Hans F¨ ollmer and Alexander Schied. Convex measures of risk and trading constraints. Finance and stochas-tics , 6(4):429–447, 2002. Hans F¨ ollmer and Alexander Schied. Stochastic Finance: An Introduction in Discrete Time . De Gruyter Graduate. De Gruyter, Berlin, Boston, 4 edition, 2016. Eric Frankel, Banghua Zhu, Sewoong Oh, and Lillian J. Ratliff. ABC-Align: Prediction-Powered Alignment with Adaptive Bias Control. arXiv preprint , 2026. Jake Gonzales, Max Horwitz, Eric Mazumdar, and Lillian J. Ratliff. Strategically robust multi-agent rein-forcement learning with linear function approximation, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2603.09208 .Tatsunori Hashimoto, Megha Srivastava, Hongseok Namkoong, and Percy Liang. Fairness without demo-graphics in repeated loss minimization. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 1929– 1938. PMLR, 2018. Matthias Heger. Consideration of risk in reinforcement learning. In William W. Cohen and Haym Hirsh, editors, Machine Learning Proceedings 1994 , pages 105–111. Morgan Kaufmann, San Francisco (CA), 1994. ISBN 978-1-55860-335-6. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-1-55860-335-6.50021-0. URL https: //www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B9781558603356500210 .Daniel Hern´ andez-Hern´ andez and Steven I. Marcus. Risk sensitive control of markov processes in count-able state space. Syst. Control Lett. , 29(3):147–155, November 1996. ISSN 0167-6911. doi: 10.1016/ S0167-6911(96)00051-5. URL https://doi.org/10.1016/S0167-6911(96)00051-5 .Kashmir Hill. A teen was suicidal. ChatGPT was the friend he confided in. The New York Times, August 2025a. URL https://www.nytimes.com/2025/08/26/technology/chatgpt-openai-suicide. html . Published August 26, 2025. Kashmir Hill. They asked an A.I. chatbot questions. the answers sent them spiraling. The New York Times, June 2025b. URL https://www.nytimes.com/2025/06/13/technology/ chatgpt-ai-chatbots-conspiracies.html . Published June 13, 2025. Kashmir Hill and Dylan Freedman. Chatbots can go into a delusional spiral. here’s how it hap-pens. The New York Times, August 2025. URL https://www.nytimes.com/2025/08/08/technology/ ai-chatbots-delusions-chatgpt.html . Published August 8, 2025. Ronald A. Howard and James E. Matheson. Risk-sensitive markov decision processes. Management Science ,18(7):356–369, 1972. ISSN 00251909, 15265501. URL http://www.jstor.org/stable/2629352 .Zhaolin Hu and L Jeff Hong. Kullback-leibler divergence constrained distributionally robust optimization. 

Available at Optimization Online , 1(2):9, 2013. Jiaming Ji, Donghai Hong, Borong Zhang, Boyuan Chen, Josef Dai, Boren Zheng, Tianyi Qiu, Boxun Li, and Yaodong Yang. Pku-saferlhf: Towards multi-level safety alignment for llms with human preference. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.15513 , 2024. Anatoli Juditsky, Arkadi Nemirovski, and Claire Tauvel. Solving variational inequalities with stochastic mirror-prox algorithm. Stochastic Systems , 1(1):17–58, 2011. 19 Moo Jin Kim, Karl Pertsch, Siddharth Karamcheti, Ted Xiao, Ashwin Balakrishna, Suraj Nair, Rafael Rafailov, Ethan Foster, Grace Lam, Pannag Sanketi, et al. OpenVLA: An open-source vision-language-action model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.09246 , 2024. G. M. Korpelevich. The extragradient method for finding saddle points and other problems. Matecon , 12: 747–756, 1976. Jonathan Lacotte, Mohammad Ghavamzadeh, Yinlam Chow, and Marco Pavone. Risk-sensitive genera-tive adversarial imitation learning. In The 22nd International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics , pages 2154–2163. PMLR, 2019. Nicolas Lanzetti, Sylvain Fricker, Saverio Bolognani, Florian D¨ orfler, and Dario Paccagnan. Strategically robust game theory via optimal transport, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.15325 .Eric Mazumdar, Kishan Panaganti, and Laixi Shi. Tractable multi-agent reinforcement learning through behavioral economics. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations , 2025. Richard D. McKelvey and Thomas R. Palfrey. Quantal response equilibria for normal form games. Games and Economic Behavior , 10(1):6–38, 1995. ISSN 0899-8256. doi: https://doi.org/10.1006/game.1995.1023. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0899825685710238 .R´ emi Munos, Michal Valko, Daniele Calandriello, Mohammad Gheshlaghi Azar, Mark Rowland, Zhao-han Daniel Guo, Yunhao Tang, Matthieu Geist, Thomas Mesnard, Cˆ ome Fiegel, et al. Nash learning from human feedback. In Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning , 2024. Adhyyan Narang, Evan Faulkner, Dmitriy Drusvyatskiy, Maryam Fazel, and Lillian J Ratliff. Multiplayer performative prediction: Learning in decision-dependent games. Journal of Machine Learning Research ,24(202):1–56, 2023. Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll L. Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, John Schulman, Jacob Hilton, Fraser Kelton, Luke Miller, Maddie Simens, Amanda Askell, Peter Welinder, Paul Christiano, Jan Leike, and Ryan Lowe. Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 35, pages 27730–27744, 2022. Juan Perdomo, Tijana Zrnic, Celestine Mendler-D¨ unner, and Moritz Hardt. Performative prediction. In 

International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 7599–7609. PMLR, 2020. Rafael Rafailov, Archit Sharma, Eric Mitchell, Christopher D Manning, Stefano Ermon, and Chelsea Finn. Direct preference optimization: Your language model is secretly a reward model. In A. Oh, T. Naumann, A. Globerson, K. Saenko, M. Hardt, and S. Levine, ed-itors, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 36, pages 53728–53741. Cur-ran Associates, Inc., 2023. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/file/ a85b405ed65c6477a4fe8302b5e06ce7-Paper-Conference.pdf .Lillian J. Ratliff and Eric Mazumdar. Inverse risk-sensitive reinforcement learning. IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control , 65(3):1256–1263, 2020. doi: 10.1109/TAC.2019.2926674. Benjamin Recht, Moritz Hardt, and Yoram Singer. Train faster, generalize better: Stability of stochastic gradient descent. arXiv preprint arXiv , 1509, 2015. Stephen M Robinson. Strongly regular generalized equations. Mathematics of Operations Research , 5(1): 43–62, 1980. R Tyrrell Rockafellar and Stanislav Uryasev. Conditional value-at-risk for general loss distributions. Journal of banking & finance , 26(7):1443–1471, 2002. R Tyrrell Rockafellar and Roger JB Wets. Variational analysis . Springer, 1998. 20 J Ben Rosen. Existence and uniqueness of equilibrium points for concave n-person games. Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric Society , pages 520–534, 1965. Andrzej Ruszczy´ nski. Risk-averse dynamic programming for markov decision processes. Math. Program. ,125(2):235–261, October 2010. ISSN 0025-5610. Mahdi Sabbaghi, George Pappas, Adel Javanmard, and Hamed Hassani. Robust policy optimization to prevent catastrophic forgetting, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2602.08813 .Shiori Sagawa, Aditi Raghunathan, Pang Wei Koh, and Percy Liang. An investigation of why overparam-eterization exacerbates spurious correlations. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 8346–8356. PMLR, 2020. John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy optimiza-tion algorithms, 2017. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1707.06347 .Lior Shani, Aviv Rosenberg, Asaf Cassel, Oran Lang, Daniele Calandriello, Avital Zipori, Hila Noga, Orgad Keller, Bilal Piot, Idan Szpektor, Avinatan Hassidim, Yossi Matias, and R´ emi Munos. Multi-turn reinforcement learning with preference human feedback. In A. Globerson, L. Mackey, D. Belgrave, A. Fan, U. Paquet, J. Tomczak, and C. Zhang, editors, Advances in Neural In-formation Processing Systems , volume 37, pages 118953–118993. Curran Associates, Inc., 2024. doi: 10.52202/079017-3779. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/file/ d77a7b289361abff82bdd2fb537ae152-Paper-Conference.pdf .Zhihong Shao, Peiyi Wang, Qihao Zhu, Runxin Xu, Junxiao Song, Xiao Bi, Haowei Zhang, Mingchuan Zhang, Y. K. Li, Y. Wu, and Daya Guo. Deepseekmath: Pushing the limits of mathematical reasoning in open language models, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.03300 .Yun Shen, Michael J. Tobia, Tobias Sommer, and Klaus Obermayer. Risk-sensitive reinforcement learning. 

Neural Computation , 26(7):1298–1328, 07 2014. ISSN 0899-7667. doi: 10.1162/NECO a 00600. URL 

https://doi.org/10.1162/NECO_a_00600 .Oliver Slumbers, David Henry Mguni, Stefano B. Blumberg, Stephen McAleer, Yaodong Yang, and Jun Wang. A game-theoretic framework for managing risk in multi-agent systems. In Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Machine Learning , ICML’23. JMLR.org, 2023. Nisan Stiennon, Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Daniel M. Ziegler, Ryan Lowe, Chelsea Voss, Alec Radford, Dario Amodei, and Paul Christiano. Learning to summarize with human feedback. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 33, pages 3008–3021, 2020. Gokul Swamy, Christoph Dann, Rahul Kidambi, Zhiwei Steven Wu, and Alekh Agarwal. A minimaximal-ist approach to reinforcement learning from human feedback. In Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning , ICML’24. JMLR.org, 2024. Hamidou Tembine, Quanyan Zhu, and Tamer Ba¸ sar. Risk-sensitive mean-field games. IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control , 59(4):835–850, 2014. doi: 10.1109/TAC.2013.2289711. Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Nikolay Bash-lykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, Dan Bikel, Lukas Blecher, Cristian Canton Fer-rer, Moya Chen, Guillem Cucurull, David Esiobu, Jude Fernandes, Jeremy Fu, Wenyin Fu, Brian Fuller, Cynthia Gao, Vedanuj Goswami, Naman Goyal, Anthony Hartshorn, Saghar Hosseini, Rui Hou, Hakan Inan, Marcin Kardas, Viktor Kerkez, Madian Khabsa, Isabel Kloumann, Artem Korenev, Punit Singh Koura, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Thibaut Lavril, Jenya Lee, Diana Liskovich, Yinghai Lu, Yuning Mao, Xavier Martinet, Todor Mihaylov, Pushkar Mishra, Igor Molybog, Yixin Nie, Andrew Poulton, Jeremy Reizenstein, Rashi Rungta, Kalyan Saladi, Alan Schelten, Ruan Silva, Eric Michael Smith, Ranjan Subra-manian, Xiaoqing Ellen Tan, Binh Tang, Ross Taylor, Adina Williams, Jian Xiang Kuan, Puxin Xu, Zheng Yan, Iliyan Zarov, Yuchen Zhang, Angela Fan, Melanie Kambadur, Sharan Narang, Aurelien Rodriguez, Robert Stojnic, Sergey Edunov, and Thomas Scialom. Llama 2: Open foundation and fine-tuned chat models, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.09288 .21 John von Neumann. Zur theorie der gesellschaftsspiele. Mathematische Annalen , 100(1):295–320, 1928. doi: 10.1007/BF01448847. URL http://eudml.org/doc/159291 .Mingzhi Wang, Chengdong Ma, Qizhi Chen, Linjian Meng, Yang Han, Jiancong Xiao, Zhaowei Zhang, Jing Huo, Weijie J Su, and Yaodong Yang. Magnetic preference optimization: Achieving last-iterate convergence for language model alignment. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations , 2025. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=PDnEDS244P .Zifan Wang, Yi Shen, Michael M. Zavlanos, and Karl H. Johansson. Learning of nash equilibria in risk-averse games. In 2024 American Control Conference (ACC) , pages 3270–3275, 2024. doi: 10.23919/ACC60939. 2024.10644891. P. Whittle. Risk-sensitive linear/quadratic/gaussian control. Advances in Applied Probability , 13(4):764–777, 1981. ISSN 00018678. URL http://www.jstor.org/stable/1426972 .Marcus Williams, Micah Carroll, Adhyyan Narang, Constantin Weisser, Brendan Murphy, and Anca Dragan. On targeted manipulation and deception when optimizing llms for user feedback. ICLR (arXiv:2411.02306) , 2025. Ali Yekkehkhany, Timothy Murray, and Rakesh Nagi. Risk-averse equilibrium for games, 2020. URL 

https://arxiv.org/abs/2002.08414 .Yuheng Zhang, Dian Yu, Baolin Peng, Linfeng Song, Ye Tian, Mingyue Huo, Nan Jiang, Haitao Mi, and Dong Yu. Iterative nash policy optimization: Aligning llms with general preferences via no-regret learning. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.00617 , 2024. Yuheng Zhang, Claire Chen, and Nan Jiang. Beyond pessimism: Offline learning in kl-regularized games. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.06738 , 2026. Runlong Zhou, Maryam Fazel, and Simon S Du. Extragradient preference optimization (EGPO): Beyond last-iterate convergence for Nash learning from human feedback. COLM (arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.08942) ,2025. Daniel M. Ziegler, Nisan Stiennon, Jeffrey Wu, Tom B. Brown, Alec Radford, Dario Amodei, Paul Chris-tiano, and Geoffrey Irving. Fine-tuning language models from human preferences. arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.08593 , 2019. Daniel M. Ziegler, Nisan Stiennon, Jeffrey Wu, Tom B. Brown, Alec Radford, Dario Amodei, Paul Christiano, and Geoffrey Irving. Fine-tuning language models from human preferences, 2020. URL https://arxiv. org/abs/1909.08593 .

# Appendix Contents 

A Extended Related Work 24 B Future Directions & Discussion 25 C Overview of Game-Theoretic Algorithms 27 

C.1 Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27 C.2 Nash Learning from Human Feedback . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27 C.3 The IPO loss as a unifying lens . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28 C.4 Algorithms in the ( ρ, μ ) framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29 

D Sources of Uncertainty in Preference Learning Data 29 

D.1 Risk over the prompt distribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30 D.2 Risk over within-prompt heterogeneity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30 D.3 Risk over the response-pair sampler . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30 D.4 Composition of Rμ and RW . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31 22 E Risk on Other Preference Losses 31 

E.1 IPO with entropic risk . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31 E.2 GRPO with reverse-KL risk . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32 E.3 DPO with entropic risk and frozen opponent . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32 E.4 KTO with utility-based shortfall risk . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32 

F Monotonicity of the Risk-Adjusted Operator 33 

F.1 Translation Invariance Preserves Constant Sum Structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33 F.2 Symmetric Self-play is Enough . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34 F.3 The two-player risk-adjusted game . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35 F.4 Symmetric Game via Self-Play . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38 F.5 Approaches for Bounding ∆ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39 

G Statistical Bias Analysis 44 

G.1 Decomposition and abstract assumptions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44 G.2 Scalar-to-vector reduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45 G.3 The bias lemma . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45 G.4 Examples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46 G.5 Aggregate bounds: (O1)-(O2) for the operator . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48 

H Stochastic Convergence Analysis with Bias 49 

H.1 Preliminaries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49 H.2 Properties of G = Σ FR in the Σ + metric . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50 H.3 Distance-generating function and projection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51 H.4 Stochastic oracle, decomposition, and filtration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51 H.5 Filtration and noise quantities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52 H.6 Three core technical lemmas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53 H.7 Deterministic-style Bound . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55 H.8 Monotone setting: bounding the expected gap . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57 H.8.1 Corollary: optimal step size . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58 H.9 Strongly monotone setting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59 H.10 Mirror Descent: corollary from extra-gradient analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62 H.10.1 Monotone case . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63 H.10.2 Strongly monotone case . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 66 

I Stackelberg Game and Two-Timescale Convergence 69 

I.1 Bias estimator and assumptions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69 I.1.1 The Two-timescale extragradient algorithm with time-varying steps . . . . . . . . . . 70 I.1.2 Convergence theorem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 70 I.1.3 Constant step-size regime . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 75 I.1.4 Finite-horizon tuned rate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 78 I.1.5 Summary: comparison of the three regimes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 80 I.2 Numerical illustration: a Bradley-Terry preference game . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 80 I.3 Stackelberg interpretation: a follower tracking joint Nash play . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 83 I.3.1 Monotone-only case: averaged-iterate convergence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 85 I.4 Two-Timescale Mirror Descent: Corollary from extra-gradient analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . 87 I.4.1 Strongly monotone case, decaying steps . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 88 I.4.2 Strongly monotone case, constant steps . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 91 I.4.3 Monotone case, constant steps . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 91 

J Stability and Generalization 92 

J.1 Structural stability of the solution mapping . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 92 J.2 From stability to generalization under the risk-adjusted IPO loss . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 95 J.3 Algorithmic Stability Generalization Bounds in Expectation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 98 J.4 Algorithmic Stability High Probability Generalization Bounds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 99 23 K Offline sample complexity 101 

K.1 Technical Novelties & Hurdles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 101 K.2 Preliminaries and main result . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 102 K.3 Proof of Theorem 7 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 103 K.3.1 Component 1: bias of the plug-in operator . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 103 K.3.2 Component 2: concentration of the plug-in operator . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 104 K.3.3 Component 3: Stability of the risk-adjusted equilibrium . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 106 K.4 Assembling the pieces . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 107 K.5 Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 109 K.6 Analog for CVaR with Rockafellar–Uryasev parameterization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 110 K.7 Empirical strong monotonicity is itself a statistical event . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 111 

L Additional Experimental Results and Details 112 

L.1 Experimental Setup and Implementation Details . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 112 L.2 Win-Rate Distributions Across Strata . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 113 L.3 Tail Robustness Across Opponents . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 114 L.4 Response Consistency & Variance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 117 L.5 Cross-Play Win Rates Across Strata . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 118 L.6 Robustness Across Harm Categories . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 120 L.7 Training Dynamics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 121 L.8 Risk-Sensitive IPO with Uncertainty over Safety Categories . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 122 L.8.1 What ”risk over group uncertainty” actually means here . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 122 L.8.2 Risk over the Safety Category ξ = e . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 122 L.8.3 Sign convention: robust vs. optimistic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 123 L.8.4 Sample-Level Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 123 

# A Extended Related Work 

RLHF. Reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF) has emerged as a standard approach for aligning language models with human preferences (Christiano et al., 2017a; Ziegler et al., 2020). The canoni-cal pipeline first learns a scalar reward model from pairwise comparisons and then optimizes a policy against it via PPO (Schulman et al., 2017). A fundamental limitation of this approach is reward hacking, where the policy is optimized against a learned proxy rather than true human preferences and can exploit gaps in the reward model, producing outputs that score highly without being genuinely preferred. Rafailov et al. (2023) proposed DPO to sidestep reward modeling entirely by reparameterizing the optimal policy directly in terms of preference pairs, though it inherits the Bradley-Terry assumption and is inherently offline, making it susceptible to distribution shift. Shao et al. (2024) introduced GRPO, which retains the PPO framework but discards the value network in favor of group-relative advantage estimation. A separate line of work drops the Bradley-Terry assumption entirely, observing that a scalar reward cannot represent non-transitive preferences (Swamy et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2025). Closest to our setting, Sabbaghi et al. (2026) extends GRPO with an entropic risk objective over a KL-bounded neighborhood of policies, with the goal of reducing brittleness to downstream fine-tuning. However, this approach remains single-player and does not engage with the game-theoretic structure of preference optimization, which is the focus of our work. 

Game-theoretic preference learning. Motivated by the limitations of reward-based approaches, a grow-ing body of work recasts alignment as a two-player game over policies using pairwise preferences directly as the payoff. Azar et al. (2024) introduced the Ψ-PO framework and the IPO loss as an offline approach to directly optimize pairwise preference probabilities against a fixed policy, without reward modeling or the Bradley-Terry assumption. Building on this IPO loss, Munos et al. (2024) and Calandriello et al. (2024a) were among the first to cast preference optimization as a two-player constant-sum game. Munos et al. (2024) recast this problem as a two-player constant-sum game, introducing Nash Mirror Descent (Nash-MD) as an online self play algorithm for finding the Nash equilibrium of a preference model, and Calandriello et al. (2024b) showed that online IPO approximates the Nash equilibrium of the preference game via self-play, 24 proposing IPO-MD with explicit convergence guarantees to the quantal response equilibrium. Several sub-sequent algorithms target the same fixed point, including MPO (Wang et al., 2025), MTPO (Shani et al., 2024), and INPO Zhang et al. (2024). Zhou et al. (2025) further generalized the IPO loss framework and showed that extragradient updates outperform mirror descent variants, thereby outperforming several prior works. However, all of these methods optimize the expected pairwise payoff, making them blind to the distribution of preference outcomes and leaving no principled way to express or control robustness to tail behavior, annotator disagreement, or safety-critical features. This work addresses this gap by introducing risk-sensitive preference games, in which players optimize convex risk measures of their preference loss rather than its expectation. 

Risk Sensitive Games. Risk sensitivity has a long history across a range of fields. In mathematical finance, Artzner et al. (1999) introduced coherent risk measures and F¨ ollmer and Schied (2002) formalized the broader class of convex risk measures which have found widespread application. Risk-sensitive objectives are equally established in sequential decision-making, starting with risk-sensitive MDPs (Hern´ andez-Hern´ andez and Marcus, 1996; Howard and Matheson, 1972), and extended to optimal control Hern´ andez-Hern´ andez and Marcus (1996); Whittle (1981), dynamic programming (Ruszczy´ nski, 2010), and reinforcement learning (Heger, 1994; Lacotte et al., 2019; Ratliff and Mazumdar, 2020; Shen et al., 2014), where it consistently improves robustness to environmental noise and modeling error potentially at a cost to expected performance. Risk in multi-agent and game-theoretic settings is less developed: Tembine et al. (2014) study risk in mean-field games, while Lanzetti et al. (2025); Slumbers et al. (2023); Wang et al. (2024); Yekkehkhany et al. (2020) each incorporate risk into finite-player games under varying structural assumptions and with varying degrees of tractability. The Risk Sensitive Quantal Response Equilibrium (RQRE) of Mazumdar et al. (2025) unifies risk aversion and bounded rationality in a framework that is both unique and computationally tractable, subject to conditions on risk aversion and bounded rationality that are independent of the underlying game. Gonzales et al. (2026) extend this to general-sum Markov games in the linear function approximation setting via an optimistic value iteration algorithm, establishing finite-sample regret bounds and proving the RQRE policy map is Lipschitz stable under payoff perturbations, thereby yielding robustness and convergence guarantees that Nash-based approaches cannot provide. We bring risk sensitivity into preference learning, replacing expected pairwise payoffs with convex risk measures so that the equilibrium concept itself reasons about the diversity in the distribution of preference outcomes rather than collapsing to the mean. 

# B Future Directions & Discussion 

The framework introduced in this work opens several directions, both theoretical and applied. We sketch the most promising below. 

Beyond the monotone regime. Our convergence and stability theory covers the monotone regime λR ≤

β/ 2, with linear last-iterate rates in the strongly monotone interior λR < β/ 2 and slower convergence at the boundary. Beyond this regime, when λR > β/ 2, the joint pseudogradient is non-monotone on the symmetric tangent space and last-iterate cycling becomes generically unavoidable: this is a fundamental barrier inherent to non-monotone games rather than an artifact of our analysis. This is also the regime in which the most distinctive behaviors of risk-sensitive equilibria emerge—where the risk-adjusted operator genuinely departs from its risk-neutral counterpart rather than merely deforming it—and where the question of what constitutes a meaningful solution concept becomes non-trivial. Productive directions here lie not in chasing last-iterate convergence (which is impossible in general) but in characterizing average-iterate dynamics, identifying structural sub-classes where convergence can be recovered, or designing algorithms that explicitly target the cycle structure. The two timescale method provides a clean bias correction framework with a nice game-theoretic inter-pretation. However, the guarantee depends on the quality of the bias estimator: clean for delta-method estimators ( Rm = O(1 /m 2)) and CVaR-RU ( Rm = 0), but constructing high-quality bias estimators for general convex risks (e.g., non-smooth distortions) is not automatic. 25 Tightening the offline rate. Our offline sample complexity bound (Theorem 7, Corollary 15) achieves a fast eO(1 /n ) rate via a direct argument combining bias control, Bernstein-type concentration, and VI-based stability. Three quantitative gaps remain. First, the dependence on the regularization strength is 1/β 2, whereas the risk-neutral analysis of Zhang et al. (2026) achieves 1 /β by exploiting skew-symmetry of the preference operator; this structure is generically lost under risk, but a refined concentration argument exploiting the residual constant-sum structure of PR may close the gap. Second, the polynomial dependence on |Y| is |Y| 3 in our analysis and could be reduced to |Y| 2 via importance-weighted sampling that equalizes pair counts, or potentially to |Y| via a row-wise concentration argument that bypasses the ℓ2-vs-ℓ∞ conversion in our stability lemma. Third, the threshold for empirical strong monotonicity scales as e8λ in our worst-case bound; a direct concentration argument on ¯λR( bP ) (rather than going through the operator’s ℓ∞ deviation) should yield a substantially tighter threshold. None of these are barriers to the qualitative result, but each would sharpen the constants. Additionally, our online generalization bound is eO(n−1/2) in the regime relevant for deep preference models (concentration-only stability ζ = O(n−1/2)), while our offline result attains the fast eO(1 /n ) rate. Closing this gap likely requires either stronger preference-model stability or a different analytical route. 

Generality of the Stackelberg correction. The bias floor that motivates our two-timescale Stackelberg formulation is not specific to preference games. Any equilibrium problem in which the operator depends nonlinearly on the data distribution—i.e., distributionally robust optimization, mean-field games with risk-sensitive agents, multi-agent reinforcement learning under coherent risk constraints—faces an analogous obstacle, and the same fast-follower architecture should apply with minimal modification. Formalizing the conditions under which such corrections recover unbiased gradients and characterizing their efficiency relative to direct importance-sampling alternatives is a natural extension. 

Risk specification at the population level. Our framework accommodates any convex risk measure satisfying translation invariance, applied at any of four structurally distinct levels of the IPO loss: the prompt distribution ( RX ), the response sampling distribution ( Rρ), the group/annotator/severity distribution ( RW ), and the opponent distribution ( Rμ). This decomposition already captures sub-population heterogeneity, annotator disagreement, and context-dependent risk aversion as design choices. Two extensions go beyond what the current framework handles. The first concerns biased preference sources . Practical preference pipelines increasingly rely on AI judges, automated annotators, or distilled reward models alongside human raters, each of which introduces its own systematic biases and failure modes — biases that compound when judges themselves are trained on human data and inherit the same coverage gaps. Modeling such sources as additional components of the RW

stratification is straightforward in principle, but quantifying how judge bias propagates through the risk-adjusted equilibrium, and whether risk-sensitivity at the policy level can correct for systematic miscalibration at the judge level, is an open question with significant practical stakes. The second is (multiplayer) performative prediction (Narang et al., 2023; Perdomo et al., 2020). Our anal-ysis treats the latent distribution Ω over which the risk operates—annotators, sub-populations, contexts—as exogenous to the players’ actions. In deployment this is rarely true: the population of users a model interacts with, the prompts it encounters, and the annotator pool that evaluates it all shift in response to the policy itself. Performative effects of this kind break the i.i.d. assumption underlying our sample complexity analysis and turn the risk-adjusted equilibrium into a fixed point of a coupled system: Ω is now a function of the joint policy ( π1, π 2), not an independent draw. Extending the risk-sensitive framework to this setting—e.g., where the risk measure itself depends on the actions over which we are optimizing—is a substantively dif-ferent problem, and one that we view as the most important applied direction beyond this work as users respond to these models and the models are typically adapting in some way on the fly. 

Empirical scope. Our empirical results establish that risk adjustment provides distributional control on held-out severity strata at the scale of our experiments. Three directions extend this scope. First, scaling: how do the constants in our generalization bounds behave at modern frontier scale, and does the variance floor become the binding constraint? Second, deployment-time guarantees: turning risk-adjusted equilibria into auditable safety properties on specified subpopulations, rather than only on the strata used at training 26 time. Third, alignment to populations rather than representative users: a normative as well as a technical project, requiring practitioners to specify which tails matter and to what degree. Our experiments are on safety alignment on PKU-SafeRLHF with LoRA fine-tuning; the qualitative findings should generalize to other alignment domains and scales, but quantitative effects and optimal risk parameters are likely domain-dependent. 

Choosing the Risk Measure. Finally, the framework gives tools for optimizing against a chosen risk measure but is silent on which risk measure to choose. Selecting the right risk measure for a given alignment objective is a modeling question we view as the natural next step rather than a gap in the present work. 

# C Overview of Game-Theoretic Algorithms 

In this section we provide an overview of reinforcement learning from human feedback and relevant game-theoretic algorithms for preference learning from human feedback. 

## C.1 Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback 

Reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF) (Christiano et al., 2017a; Ziegler et al., 2020) fits a scalar reward model from pairwise comparison data and then optimizes a policy against it. Given a dataset 

{(x(i), y (i) 

> w

, y (i) 

> l

)}Ni=1 where yw is preferred to yl conditional on prompt x, RLHF assumes a Bradley-Terry model (Bradley and Terry, 1952) 

P(y ≻ y′ | x) = σ (rϕ(x, y ) − rϕ(x, y ′)) , σ(t) = 11 + e−t , (11) and learns the reward model rϕ : X × Y → R by minimizing the cross-entropy loss 

Lr (ϕ) = − 1

N

> N

X

> i=1

log σ



rϕ(x(i), y (i) 

> w

) − rϕ(x(i), y (i) 

> l

)



.

The policy is then optimized against this reward subject to a KL penalty toward a reference policy πref ,

π⋆ϕ = arg max 

> π

E

> x∼ρX



E 

> y∼π(·| x)

[rϕ(x, y )] − β KL( π(· | x)∥πref (· | x)) 



, (12) typically using PPO (Schulman et al., 2017) or a variant such as GRPO (Shao et al., 2024). Under tabular softmax parameterization, (12) admits the closed-form solution 

θ⋆ϕ = θref + rϕ

β ,

which DPO (Rafailov et al., 2023) exploits to optimize the policy directly from preference pairs without explicit reward modeling. The reliance on (11) restricts RLHF to preference structures expressible by a scalar reward and transitive preferences, motivating the preference-game formulation of NLHF. 

## C.2 Nash Learning from Human Feedback 

Nash learning from human feedback (Munos et al., 2024) replaces the scalar reward model of RLHF with a preference model P : X × Y × Y → [0 , 1] that takes both responses as input 

P(y ≻ y′ | x) = Pa randomly chosen annotator prefers y to y′ given x,

and satisfies P(y ≻ y′ | x) + P(y′ ≻ y | x) = 1. Following the setup in Section 2, we suppress the prompt x

and assume |X | = 1 for notational simplicity; all definitions extend by conditioning on the prompt. Collecting the preference probabilities into a matrix P = [ P(y ≻ y′)] (y,y ′)∈Y×Y , the anti-symmetry of P becomes the constant-sum identity 

P + P ⊤ = 11 ⊤. (13) 27 For two policies, π1, π 2 ∈ ∆( Y), the preference of π1 over π2 is 

V (π1, π 2) = P(π1 ≻ π2) = E

> y∼π1, y ′∼π2

[P(y ≻ y′)] = π⊤ 

> 1

P π 2,

which together with (13) defines a two-player constant-sum matrix game. The NLHF objective is to find a policy that wins on average against any opponent, 

π⋆ = arg max 

> π

min  

> π′

V (π, π ′),

which is a Nash equilibrium of the preference game by the minimax theorem (von Neumann, 1928). 

Regularized game and the QRE. As in RLHF, NLHF in practice regularizes toward a reference policy 

πref ∈ ∆◦(Y) via a KL penalty. The KL-regularized value function and corresponding objective are 

Vβ (π1, π 2) = π⊤ 

> 1

P π 2 − β KL( π1∥πref ) + β KL( π2∥πref ),π⋆β = arg max 

> π1

min 

> π2

Vβ (π1, π 2).

The KL term makes Vβ strictly concave in π1 and strictly convex in π2, so the regularized game has a unique equilibrium (Munos et al., 2024). Under a softmax parameterization πθ ∝ exp( θ), the first-order optimality condition for each player produces a coupled pair of fixed-point equations 

θ⋆ 

> 1

= θref + P π θ⋆

> 2

β , θ⋆ 

> 2

= θref + P ⊤ πθ⋆

> 1

β ,

which the constant-sum identity (13) collapses to a single equation 

θ⋆β = θref + P π ⋆β

β , (14) with π⋆ 

> 1

= π⋆ 

> 2

= π⋆β at equilibrium. The unique solution to (14) is the quantal response equilibrium (QRE) of the regularized preference game (McKelvey and Palfrey, 1995). Every game-theoretic NLHF algorithm we discuss below targets (14) at its fixed point. 

## C.3 The IPO loss as a unifying lens 

Solving the fixed-point equation (14) requires a tractable loss whose gradient drives the iterates toward the QRE. The generalized IPO loss (Azar et al., 2024; Calandriello et al., 2024b; Zhou et al., 2025) provides exactly this. Let ρ ∈ ∆( Y × Y ) be a sampling distribution over response pairs and μ ∈ ∆( Y) be an opponent distribution. The generalized IPO loss is 

LIPO (θ; ρ, μ ) = E

> (y,y ′)∼ρ

"

log πθ (y)πref (y′)

πθ (y′)πref (y) − 1

β E 

> y′′ ∼μ

[P(y ≻ y′′ ) − P (y′ ≻ y′′ )] 

2#

. (15) Define the response-pair preconditioner Σ( ρ) := E

> (y,y ′)∼ρ

(1y − 1y′ )( 1y − 1y′ )⊤ .

A direct calculation gives the gradient identity 

∇θ LIPO (θ; ρ, μ ) = 2 Σ( ρ)



θ − θref − P μ β



. (16) Two structural observations follow. First, the bracket in (16) is exactly the residual of the QRE fixed-point equation (14) when the opponent plays μ, so the IPO gradient is a preconditioned fixed-point residual. Second, ρ and μ play distinct structural roles: ρ shapes the geometry of the update through Σ( ρ) but does not alter the equilibrium, while μ is the opponent against which the preference operator P is probed and is where the game-theoretic content lives. This decomposition organizes the game-theoretic NLHF literature. Every algorithm we discuss below is determined by three choices: a sampling distribution ρ, an opponent μ, and a step rule (a single forward step, a magnetic-adjusted forward step, or a two-step extragradient update) applied to the gradient (16). The algorithms differ in these choices but share (14) as their target fixed point. 28 C.4 Algorithms in the (ρ, μ ) framework 

Throughout this subsection ¯ π := Uniform( Y) ⊗ Uniform( Y) denotes uniform sampling over response pairs, sg[ ·] denotes the stop-gradient operator, and η > 0 is a step size. All algorithms perform parameter updates on θ using the IPO gradient (16) evaluated at specific choices of ( ρ, μ ). 

Online IPO/OMD. The online IPO algorithm of Calandriello et al. (2024b) sets ρ = ¯ π and μ = sg[ π(t)]. The update is a single gradient step on LIPO (θ; ¯ π, sg[ π(t)]), equivalent to the online mirror descent recursion 

θ(t+1) = (1 − ηβ ) θ(t) + ηβ 



θref + P π (t)

β



.

This is Picard iteration on (14) with the opponent identified with the player’s current policy. Convergence is in average iterate rate O(1 /T ); the last iterate cycles around the QRE and is not guaranteed to converge. 

Nash-MD. Munos et al. (2024) introduce Nash-MD with ρ = ¯ π and μ = sg[ π(t)mix ], where π(t)mix is the geometric mixture 

π(t)mix (y) ∝ π(t)(y)1−ηβ πref (y)ηβ .

The opponent is pulled toward πref , which acts as a magnet that breaks the cycling of vanilla OMD. The authors establish last-iterate convergence to the QRE in KL divergence rate O(1 /T ) with step size 

ηt = Θ(1 /(βt )). 

Nash-MD-PG. Munos et al. (2024) also proposes a policy-gradient counterpart of Nash-MD, targeting the same fixed point but implemented through nested inner optimization rather than the single-step IPO update. Each outer iteration approximately solves an inner regularized best-response problem against π(t)mix 

via several gradient steps. The approximation introduces inner-loop error that accumulates across outer iterations, convergence guarantees in the small-β regime are not available. 

MPO. Wang et al. (2025) replace the geometric-mixture magnet of Nash-MD with a slowly-moving anchor: 

μ = sg[ π(τ (t)) ] for a lagged index τ (t) < t , with the anchor refreshed on a slower timescale. They show last-iterate linear convergence to the QRE at rate (1 + ηβ )−T with step size constraint η ≤ O (β). 

EGPO. Zhou et al. (2025) introduce a two-step extragradient update keeping ρ = ¯ π throughout but alternating μ. The extrapolation step uses μ = sg[ π(t)] to produce an intermediate iterate, and the correction step uses μ = π(t+1 /2) as the opponent: 

θ(t+1 /2) = (1 − ηβ ) θ(t) + ηβ 



θref + P π (t)

β



,θ(t+1) = (1 − ηβ ) θ(t) + ηβ 



θref + P π (t+1 /2) 

β



.

The correction step queries preferences against the predicted opponent rather than the current one, which removes the rotational component responsible for the cycling of OMD. The authors establish last-iterate linear convergence in KL divergence at rate (1 − ηβ )T for any step size η ≤ 1/(β + 3), and show that under sub-Gaussian gradient noise with variance proxy σ2, the rate is preserved with an additive O(σ2 log |Y| /β )term. 

# D Sources of Uncertainty in Preference Learning Data 

The main paper develops risk over the opponent distribution μ. Three other places where risk can enter are the prompt distribution, an auxiliary variable indexing within-prompt heterogeneity, and the response-pair sampler. We treat each in turn and then discuss composition of risks. 29 Setup. Restoring the prompt x ∈ X explicitly, the preference oracle returns P(y ≻ y′ | x) and may depend on an auxiliary variable w ∈ W giving P(y ≻ y′ | x, w ). The per-prompt risk-adjusted IPO loss with risk over μ is 

ℓR

> IPO

(θ; x, ρ, μ ) = E

> (y,y ′)∼ρ|x

"

log πθ (y | x)πref (y′ | x)

πθ (y′ | x)πref (y | x) − 1

β

 (PR μ)y − (PR μ)y′

2#

, (17) and the aggregate training loss takes the outer expectation over prompts, 

LR

> IPO

(θ; ρ, μ ) = E

> x∼ρX

ℓR

> IPO

(θ; x, ρ, μ ) . (18) The remaining cases correspond to placing risk on x, on w, or on the response-pair sampler ρ.

## D.1 Risk over the prompt distribution 

Replace the outer expectation Ex∼ρX in (18) with a risk functional RX over prompts, 

LR,RX 

> IPO

(θ; ρ, μ ) = RX ℓR

> IPO

(θ; x, ρ, μ ) .

This is distributionally robust optimization over prompts. Natural choices for RX are CVaR at level α,which focuses on the worst-α tail of difficult prompts, and KL-ball DRO, which optimizes over the worst re-weighting of ρX within a KL ball. The per-prompt fixed-point equation is unchanged; for each x, the equilibrium θ⋆β, R(· | x) still satisfies the QRE condition with operator PR(·, · | x). What changes is the effective training distribution over prompts; the algorithm acts as if prompts were drawn from an adversarial re-weighting of ρX . Risk over x does not alter the game; it alters which per-prompt game the algorithm prioritizes fitting across the population. 

## D.2 Risk over within-prompt heterogeneity 

When the preference oracle depends on an auxiliary variable w indexing groups, annotators, or latent labels, the risk-neutral preference operator integrates over w | x,

E 

> w|x

[P(y ≻ y′′ | x, w )] .

Replacing the expectation with a risk functional RW defines the doubly risk-adjusted preference operator (PRW ,Rμ μ)xy := RW [Rμ [P(y ≻ y′′ | x, w ) : y′′ ∼ μ] : w | x] ,

which sits in the same position as PR inside the per-prompt loss (17). The per-prompt QRE fixed point becomes 

θ⋆β, RW ,Rμ (· | x) = θref (· | x) + PRW ,Rμ (·, · | x) π⋆(· | x)

β .

Structurally, risk over w acts on the inner preference operator in the same way as risk over μ—both replace an expectation in the preference computation with a risk functional and produce the same kind of fixed-point modification. The difference is what each models. Risk over μ targets robustness against an adversarial opponent in the game, whereas risk over w targets robustness across heterogeneous evaluators of a fixed pair-wise comparison. When RW is CVaR over annotator identity or a worst-case over safety labels, this recovers a group-robust formulation closely related to group-DRO. 

## D.3 Risk over the response-pair sampler 

Risk over the response pair sampler ρ replaces the outer expectation E(y,y ′)∼ρ in the per-prompt loss (17) with a risk functional. This modification reshapes the preconditioner that multiplies the gradient and changes the geometry of the update, but does not modify the bracket of the IPO gradient identity. The fixed-point equation is therefore unchanged, and the algorithm still targets the same risk-adjusted QRE, therefore risk over ρ acts purely as a sampling knob. 30 D.4 Composition of Rμ and RW

Risk over μ and risk over w both modify the inner preference operator and the two can be composed. Risk functionals do not commute in general, so the order of composition is a modeling choice. The two natural orderings are (A) (PRW ◦R μ μ)xy = RW

> w

h

Rμy′′ [P(y ≻ y′′ | x, w )] 

i

,

(B) (PRμ◦R W μ)xy = Rμy′′ 

RW 

> w

[P(y ≻ y′′ | x, w )]  .

Ordering (A) corresponds to applying the opponent-risk first and group-risk on the outside, meaning the policy is robust against an adversarial opponent within each group, and then robust across groups. Ordering (B) reverses this, the policy is robust across groups for each opponent draw, and then robust against an adversarial opponent. The two coincide when at least one of Rμ and RW is an expectation, in which case the construction reduces to the risk-neutral preference operator. When both reduce to expectations, the operator is risk-neutral. The gradient identity 

∇θ LRμ,RW 

> IPO

(θ; ρ, μ ) = 2 Σ( ρ)



θ − θref − PRW ◦R μ μβ



holds with either ordering substituted into the operator. The bracket remains the residual of the correspond-ing fixed-point equation, and the strong-monotonicity analysis of the main paper applies with the composed operator in place of PR.

# E Risk on Other Preference Losses 

The risk modification developed in the main paper is not specific to IPO. The same construction—replace an expectation over preference outcomes with a convex risk functional—applies to the broader family of preference-tuning losses. We work through the construction for IPO (Calandriello et al., 2024b), DPO (Rafailov et al., 2023), GRPO (Shao et al., 2024), and KTO (Ethayarajh et al., 2024). Each loss corresponds to a particular choice of risk functional Rτ (parametrized by a risk level τ ) and reference distribution μ, and the standard risk-neutral loss is recovered in the limit of τ .Throughout, we write hπ (y, y ′) := log π(y)πref (y′) 

> π(y′)πref (y)

for the log-ratio term, Xy := P (y ≻ Y ′) for the random variable representing the win-rate of y against an opponent Y ′ ∼ μ, and Rτ (y) := −R τ (Xy ) for the risk-adjusted action value. The squared-residual form 

bLτ (π) = E

> (y,y ′)∼D



hπ (y, y ′) − β−1  bRτ,m (y) − bRτ,m (y′)2

(19) is common to each loss; what changes is the choice of Rτ , μ, and the resulting estimator bRτ,m .

## E.1 IPO with entropic risk 

Take μ to be the data distribution D over response pairs and Rτ to be the entropic risk measure 

Rent  

> τ

(Xy ) = 1

τ log E 

> Y′∼μ

h

e−τ P (y≻Y ′)i

,

giving the risk-adjusted action value 

RIPO  

> τ

(y) = − 1

τ log E 

> Y′∼μ

h

e−τ P (y≻Y ′)i

.

Given Y ′ 

> 1

, . . . , Y ′

> m
> iid

∼ μ, the plug-in estimator is 

bRIPO  

> τ,m

(y) = − 1

τ log 

 1

m

> m

X

> j=1

e−τ P (y≻Y ′ 

> j)

 ,

and substituting into (19) yields the risk-adjusted IPO loss. As τ → 0, a Taylor expansion gives bRIPO  

> τ,m

(y) →

> 1
> m

P 

> j

P (y ≻ Y ′ 

> j

), the empirical mean win-rate, and the standard IPO loss is recovered. 31 E.2 GRPO with reverse-KL risk 

GRPO (Shao et al., 2024) draws a group of opponent responses from the current policy and computes group-normalized advantages. The corresponding risk formulation takes μ = πold and uses the reverse-KL risk measure 

RRKL  

> τ

(Xy ) = sup 

> p∈∆



Ep[−Xy ] − 1

τ KL( μ ∥ p)



.

The KKT optimality condition for the inner adversary gives 

p⋆(y′′ ) = μ(y′′ )

τ (μ0 − P (y ≻ y′′ )) ,

with μ0 > 1 fixed by P 

> y′′

p⋆(y′′ ) = 1. Substituting and applying the Fenchel identity for φ(t) = − log t

produces 

RRKL  

> τ

(y) = μ0 − 1

τ E

> y′′ ∼μ



1 + log 1

τ (μ0 − P (y ≻ y′′ )) 



.

The weights p⋆(y′′ ) ∝ μ(y′′ )/(μ0 −P (y ≻ y′′ )) up-weight opponents against which y wins by a small margin— the hardest matchup in the group—producing a risk-averse analogue of group-relative importance weighting. The plug-in estimator bRRKL  

> τ,m

replaces the expectation over y′′ ∼ μ with the empirical mean over a group 

Y ′′  

> 1

, . . . , Y ′′  

> m

and substitutes an empirical bμ0 for the normalization. As τ → ∞ , μ0 → 1+ and p⋆ → μ, so 

RRKL  

> τ

(y) → Ey′′ ∼μ[P (y ≻ y′′ )], recovering the empirical group win-rate that defines the standard GRPO advantage. 

## E.3 DPO with entropic risk and frozen opponent 

DPO (Rafailov et al., 2023) corresponds to the best-response variant of the preference game, the opponent is frozen at μ = πref rather than co-optimized. With the same entropic risk as IPO, 

RDPO  

> τ

(y) = − 1

τ log E 

> Y′∼πref

h

e−τ P (y≻Y ′)i

,

and the plug-in estimator bRDPO  

> τ,m

is computed from m draws Y ′ 

> j

∼ πref . As τ → 0, the action value collapses to EY ′∼πref [P (y ≻ Y ′)]. Under a Bradley-Terry model, this expected win rate against πref is in the same equivalence class as the optimal reward r⋆, recovering the standard DPO objective up to the substitution of a squared residual for the cross-entropy form. The risk-adjusted version replaces πref with the risk-tilted opponent p⋆(y′′ ) ∝ πref (y′′ )e−τ P (y≻y′′ ).

## E.4 KTO with utility-based shortfall risk 

KTO (Ethayarajh et al., 2024) is built on the Kahneman-Tversky value function with a sigmoid utility, encoding loss aversion through asymmetric saturation. The pairwise-preference analogue uses the utility-based shortfall risk measure with sigmoid utility u = σ, risk tolerance r > 0, and μ = πref :

Rsf  

> τ

(Xy ) = inf 

> p∈∆



Ep[−Xy ] + 1

τ inf 

> α> 0

1

α



r + Ep



u∗



α πref (y′′ )

p(y′′ )

 

.

The KKT condition for inner adversary yields 

p⋆(y′′ ) ∝ πref (y′′ ) · σ τ (μ0 − P (y ≻ y′′ )) − r,

and the risk-adjusted action value is 

RKTO  

> τ

(y) = E 

> Y′∼πref

P (y ≻ Y ′) · σ τ (μ0 − P (y ≻ Y ′)) − r + C(τ, μ 0, r ),

where C is a constant in y. The sigmoid weights σ(τ (μ0 − P (y ≻ y′′ )) − r) implement the loss aversion: opponents against which the policy wins by a small margin—those near the reference point r—receive the 32 highest weight, encoding the prospect-theoretic asymmetry that motivates the original KTO. As τ → 0, the sigmoid saturates to a constant and RKTO  

> τ

(y) reduces to a scaled expected win-rate against πref plus a y-independent constant, recovering the structural template of standard KTO under the squared-residual form. We note that the original KTO of Ethayarajh et al. (2024) is defined on per-example desirability labels rather than pairwise preferences, thus the construction above is the natural pairwise-preference analogue, retaining the sigmoid utility and the loss-aversion structure of KTO while operating on the same preference oracle P (y ≻ y′′ ) used by IPO, DPO, and GRPO. 

# F Monotonicity of the Risk-Adjusted Operator 

In the body, we demonstrated the conditions under which it was sufficient to consider a single player fixed point iteration (Theorem 1), as many of our practical implementations followed that framework. How-ever, there are many scenarios where those conditions are violated. This is because in general ( P (1)  

> R

μ)y +(P (2)  

> R

μ)y̸ = 1, i.e., risk typically breaks the constant sum structure. 

## F.1 Translation Invariance Preserves Constant Sum Structure 

The risk-neutral analysis of NLHF relies on the constant-sum identity P + P ⊤ = 11 ⊤ to collapse the coupled fixed-point equations (4) into the single expression (2) satisfied by both players at equilibrium. Under nonlinear risk transformations, this structure no longer holds at the level of certainty equivalents: for a general convex risk measure R, one has R(X)̸ = −R (−X), so zero-sum structure is broken at the utility level. Indeed, as observed in Example 1, at the certainty equivalent level (aka the utility level) risk transformations are nonlinear and therefore break the zero-sum structure of the preference learning problem (or any zero sum matrix game for that matter). We first show that despite this apparent shortcoming, when the risk measure is translation invariant, as are convex risk measures, the property R(1 − X) = 1 + R(−X) ensures the constant sum structure is preserved. We formally restate and prove Lemma 1 from the main. 

Lemma 1 (Operator-level constant-sum) . Let P ∈ R|Y|×|Y| satisfy P + P ⊤ = 11 ⊤. Let R be translation invariant, i.e., R(X + c) = R(X) + c for all constants c ∈ R. For μ ∈ ∆( Y), define the risk-adjusted payoff operators ( P1

> R

μ)a := R(Pa,Y ′ ), and ( P2

> R

μ)a := R(−P Y ′,a ), with Y ′ ∼ μ. Then, for every μ ∈ ∆( Y), we have 

P1

> R

μ = 1 + P2

> R

μ.

Proof. Fix a ∈ Y and let Y ′ ∼ μ. Since P + P ⊤ = 11 ⊤, we have 

Pa,Y ′ = 1 − PY ′,a .

Therefore, by translation invariance of R, we have that (P (1)  

> R

μ)a = R(Pa,Y ′ ) = R(1 − PY ′,a ) = 1 + R(−PY ′,a ) = 1 + ( P (2)  

> R

μ)a.

Since this holds for every a ∈ Y , the vector identity follows. 

Gauge invariance. The softmax map softmax( θ) := eθ 

> 1⊤eθ

satisfies softmax( θ + c1) = softmax( θ) for every scalar c. Adding a constant to all entries of a logit vector therefore leaves the policy unchanged; this is the one-dimensional gauge of the parameterization. 

Translation Invariant Risk Measures. Many well known risk measures are translation invariant. In particular, the commonly used class of convex risk measures (Definition 1). In the remainder of this section we prove this property for the two risk measures we use in experiments, entropic risk and CVaR. 

Lemma 2 (Entropic risk obeys translation invariance) . Recall that the entropic risk of a random variable Z

with risk parameter τ is given by Ent τ (Z) = − 1 

> τ

log ( E[exp( −τ Z )]). For any constant c we have Ent τ (Z+c) = Ent τ (Z) + c.33 Proof. The result is immediate from the following simple algebraic manipulations: Ent τ (Z + c) = − 1

τ log ( E[exp( −τ Z − τ c )]) = − 1

τ log  exp( −τ c ) E[exp( −τ Z )] 

= c − 1

τ log E[exp( −τ Z )] = Ent τ (Z) + c. 

We now prove the same for CVaR. The mechanism is different: entropic risk-aversion factors a constant shift through the exponential, whereas CVaR uses translation invariance directly. Yet, the conclusion is identical. For a real-valued random variable Z with distribution function FZ , define the lower α-quantile Var α(Z) := inf {z : FZ (z) ≥ α} and the lower-tail conditional expectation CVaR α(Z) := 1

α EZ · 1{Z ≤ Var α(Z)} + atom-correction = 1

α

Z α

> 0

Var u(Z) d u, (20) the second equality holding for general distributions (Rockafellar and Uryasev, 2002). Risk-averse use of CVaR takes the lower tail, with α ∈ (0 , 1) the tail probability; α → 1 recovers E[Z], α → 0 recovers essinf( Z). The Rockafellar–Uryasev variational formula CVaR α(Z) = sup 

> η

n

η − 1 

> α

E(η − Z)+

o

(21) makes the translation property transparent: the supremum over η shifts by c when Z is replaced by Z + c.

Lemma 3 (Translation invariance of CVaR) . For any real-valued random variable Z on a probability space and any deterministic constant c ∈ R,CVaR α(Z + c) = CVaR α(Z) + c. 

Proof. By (21), the change of variable η 7 → η + c gives CVaR α(Z + c) = sup 

> η

η − 1 

> α

E[( η − (Z + c)) +]

= sup 

> η′

(η′ + c) − 1 

> α

E[( η′ − Z)+]

= c + CVaR α(Z).

Equivalently, Var α(Z + c) = Var α(Z) + c (quantiles shift by c), and (20) preserves this shift through the conditional expectation. 

## F.2 Symmetric Self-play is Enough 

For the ease of reference, we recall Theorem 1 from the main body before proving it. 

Theorem 1. Let P + P ⊤ = 11 ⊤ and let R be a convex risk measure. In the regime β ∈ (0 , ∞), the unique Nash equilibrium ( π⋆θ1 , π ⋆θ2 ) of the RSPG is a symmetric (namely, π⋆ := π⋆θ1 = π⋆θ2 ) and solves the fixed-point equation θ⋆ = θref + PR πθ⋆ /β . Moreover, θ⋆ 

> 1

= θ⋆ 

> 2

+ c1 for some c ∈ R.

Proof. Let ( πθ⋆ 

> 1

, π θ⋆ 

> 2

) denote the unique Nash equilibrium, satisfying the coupled fixed-point equations (4). Since R is translation invariant and P + P ⊤ = 11 ⊤ by Lemma 1 we have that (P2 

> R

πθ⋆ 

> 1

)a = ( P1 

> R

πθ⋆ 

> 1

)a − 1.

34 Let eθ2 := θ⋆ 

> 2

− β−11, and note πθ⋆ 

> 2

= πeθ2 by gauge invariance. Substituting into (4) yields 

θ⋆ 

> 1

= θref + P1 

> R

πeθ2

β , eθ2 = θref + P1 

> R

πθ⋆

> 1

β ,

which are symmetric in θ⋆ 

> 1

and eθ2. Uniqueness of the equilibrium forces θ⋆ 

> 1

= eθ2, and hence πθ⋆ 

> 1

= πeθ2 =

πθ⋆ 

> 2

.

## F.3 The two-player risk-adjusted game 

In the specific case of a constant sum preference matrix and shared translation invariant risk measures, we have just shown that symmetric self play suffices. However, there are many settings under which it may be desirable to break one or more of those conditions. For example one might want to solve a preference game with asymmetric risk profiles, considering both a risk-averse and a risk-seeking player. In these settings, the game is genuinely general-sum and it no longer suffices to consider symmetric self play. The goal of this section is to study the monotonicity of risk-averse games in the most general setting, as this property is key to proving existence and convergence. We specialize these results to the symmetric self play operator in Section F.4. Recall that each player i ∈ { 1, 2} chooses logits θi ∈ R|Y| inducing a softmax policy πθi ∈ ∆( Y). The risk-adjusted utility for player i is 

V Ri 

> β

(θ1, θ 2) = π⊤ 

> θi

P (i) 

> Ri

πθ−i − β KL( πθi ∥πref ),

where P (1)  

> R1

= PR1 is the risk-adjusted preference operator from (3), and P (2)  

> R2

is the analogue for player 2 with the sign reversed (since player 2 prefers responses that lose preference comparisons): 

 P (2)  

> R2

μ 

> y′

= −R 2

P(y ≻ y′) : y ∼ μ.

The joint Nash fixed-point equation. Player i’s first-order condition (set ∇θi V Ri 

> β

= 0 and use softmax stationarity) gives 

θ⋆i = θref + P (i) 

> Ri

πθ⋆

> −i

β , i = 1 , 2. (22) This is a coupled pair of fixed-point equations. The natural object for studying convergence of learning dynamics targeting these is the pseudogradient (Rosen, 1965), here given by 

FR(θ) := θ1 − θref − β−1 P (1)  

> R1

πθ2

θ2 − θref − β−1 P (2)  

> R2

πθ1

!

, θ := ( θ1, θ 2), (23) whose zeros coincide with the Nash equilibria (22). Operationally, extragradient and mirror descent applied to each player’s IPO loss perform forward (or extragradient) steps on FR, with each player’s step using the corresponding block. Strong monotonicity of FR implies last-iterate linear convergence for extragradient and contraction for mirror descent, by standard VI machinery. We will need the following lemma in order to study (23). 

Lemma 4 (Softmax monotonicity) . For any θ, θ ′ ∈ R|Y| with induced softmax policies π, π ′,

θ − θ′, π − π′ ≥ KL( π∥π′) + KL( π′∥π).

This follows from strong convexity of the log-partition function θ 7 → log P 

> y

eθy and is standard; see, e.g., (Cen et al., 2021). We now seek μR > 0 such that 

FR(θ) − FR(θ′), π − π′ ≥ μR · D(π, π′), (24) 35 where π = ( πθ1 , π θ2 ), the inner product is the natural one on the product space, and 

D(π, π′) = 

> 2

X

> i=1

KL( πθi ∥π′ 

> θi

).

Write ∆ θi := θi − θ′ 

> i

and ∆ πi := πθi − π′ 

> θi

for i = 1 , 2. Expanding (24) using (23), we have 

FR(θ) − FR(θ′), π − π′ = β

> 2

X

> i=1

∆θi, ∆πi

| {z }

> (A i): own-player softmax

−

> 2

X

> i=1

P (i) 

> Ri

πθ−i − P (i) 

> Ri

π′ 

> θ−i

, ∆πi

| {z }

> (B i): cross-player coupling

. (25) The own-player terms (A i) are handled by softmax monotonicity (Lemma 4) applied to each player separately: 

X

> i

(A i) ≥

> 2

X

> i=1

KL( πθi ∥π′ 

> θi

) + KL( π′ 

> θi

∥πθi ). (26) The cross-player terms (B i) are the new objects, and they are now genuinely bilinear across players rather than quadratic in a single difference vector. To study (B i), define the Jacobians 

J(i) 

> Ri

(π) := ∇μP (i) 

> Ri

(μ) μ=π

∈ R|Y|×|Y| .

By the mean value theorem, we can write 

P (i) 

> Ri

πθ−i − P (i) 

> Ri

π′ 

> θ−i

=

Z 10

(∇P (i) 

> Ri

)( tπ θ−i + (1 − t)π′ 

> θ−i

) = J(i) 

> Ri

(¯ π−i)( πθ−i − π′ 

> θ−i

) = J(i) 

> Ri

∆π−i

for some point ¯ π−i on the segment between πθ−i and π′ 

> θ−i

. Then (B i) = ∆ π⊤ 

> i

J(i) 

> Ri

(¯ π−i) ∆ π−i. Stacking ∆π := (∆ π1, ∆π2) ∈ R2|Y| , the cross-player contribution is 

> 2

X

> i=1

(B i) = ∆ π⊤JR(¯ π1, ¯π2) ∆ π, JR := 0 J(1)  

> R1

(¯ π2)

J(2)  

> R2

(¯ π1) 0

!

. (27) Only the symmetric part of JR contributes to the quadratic form: 

J sym  

> R

= 12

0 J(1)  

> R1

(¯ π2) + J(2)  

> R2

(¯ π1)⊤

J(2)  

> R2

(¯ π1) + J(1)  

> R1

(¯ π2)⊤ 0

!

.

Risk-neutral baseline. When R1 = R2 = E, J(1)  

> E

= P and J(2)  

> E

= −P ⊤ identically, so the off-diagonal block of J sym  

> E

is 

> 12

 J(1)  

> E

+ ( J(2)  

> E

)⊤ = 12

 P + ( −P ⊤)⊤ = 12 (P − P ) = 0 .

Hence J sym  

> E

≡ 0, on the full space and a fortiori on the joint zero-sum subspace. This is the constant-sum miracle: the cross-player coupling makes no contribution to the monotonicity quadratic form, leaving only the softmax-monotonicity bound and yielding the classical β-strongly-monotone result. Equivalently, in the decomposition P = 12 11 ⊤ + A with A antisymmetric, the rank-one block contributes a multiple of 11 ⊤ that vanishes on W0, while the antisymmetric part A contributes 12 (A + A⊤) = 0 to the symmetrization. 

Joint risk-distortion matrix. Define 

J R(¯ π1, ¯π2) := J sym  

> R

(¯ π1, ¯π2), (28) since the risk-neutral subtraction is zero. 36 Combining (26) with (27), (28), and Pinsker’s inequality applied to each player block, we have 

FR(θ) − FR(θ′), π − π′ ≥ β

> 2

X

> i=1

KL( πθi ∥πθ′ 

> i

) + KL( πθ′ 

> i

∥πθi ) − ∆π⊤J R ∆π

≥ (β − 2λR) ·

> 2

X

> i=1

KL( πθi ∥πθ′ 

> i

),

where the worst-case risk-distortion eigenvalue is taken over displacements in the tangent space of the joint constraint set. 

The joint constraint set and its tangent space. The two-player game lives on a constraint set C ⊆

R|Y| /1×R|Y| /1 of joint parameters, with associated policy-space constraint Π := softmax( C) ⊆ ∆( Y)×∆( Y)and tangent cone TC (v) at v ∈ C. The variational inequality formulation is 0 ∈ FR(v) + NC (v),

and monotonicity is assessed on displacements in TC (v). In this notation, the worst-case risk-distortion eigenvalue is 

λR := sup 

> (¯ π1,¯π2)∈Π

sup   

> v∈TC(·),∥v∥2=1

v⊤J R(¯ π1, ¯π2) v. (29) The outer supremum is over linearization points in the policy-space constraint Π; the inner supremum is the standard operator norm restricted to the tangent space. When C is a linear subspace, TC (v) does not depend on v and we drop the argument. In the unconstrained case (the default in the body), C is the full space modulo the per-player softmax gauge, and the tangent space is 

TC = 1⊥ × 1⊥ =  (v1, v 2) ∈ R2|Y| : 1⊤v1 = 1⊤v2 = 0 .

This is the joint zero-sum subspace. The framework also accommodates constrained or set-valued policy classes (simplex constraints, trust-region clipping, symmetric self-play); in each case the appropriate TC

replaces the unconstrained version above. The symmetric self-play specialization TC = T sym is treated in Lemma 5. 

Theorem 8 (Strong monotonicity of the joint pseudogradient) . Let C be a closed convex constraint set with tangent cone TC , and let λR be defined by (29) on TC . If λR ≤ β/ 2, then the pseudogradient FR is 

μR-strongly monotone with respect to the product KL on C, with modulus 

μR = β − 2 λR.

Consequently, the Nash equilibrium (22) is unique, and deterministic extragradient and mirror descent applied to the players’ IPO losses converge last-iterate linearly at rate O (1 − ημ R)T .

Three regimes. The condition λR ≤ β/ 2 admits three regimes with different consequences for convergence and existence: 

• Risk-aligned with regularization (λR ≤ 0): the cross-player coupling is anti-aligned with the softmax monotonicity direction, and the modulus is strengthened relative to the risk-neutral baseline ( μR ≥ β). 

• Moderate risk (0 < λ R ≤ β/ 2): strong monotonicity survives with reduced modulus. 

• Aggressive risk (λR > β/ 2): the quadratic form can be negative on TC , strong monotonicity fails, and cycling can re-emerge. This is the regime in which risk overpowers KL regularization. 37 Discussion. A consequence of the joint formulation is that the two players need not share a risk functional, so long as we run mirror descent or extragradient on the full joint psuedogradient (23). Setting R1̸ = R2

corresponds to modeling scenarios in which the players evaluate uncertainty differently, for example one might wish to run an optimistic player against a pessimistic player. We also note that Theorem 1 relies on the constant-sum identity. For preference operators P that are not constant-sum (i.e. where P + P ⊤̸ = 11 ⊤), 

P (1)  

> R

μ − P (2)  

> R

μ is not in general a multiple of 1, the gauge equivalence argument in the proof breaks down, and the joint Nash genuinely lies off the diagonal. Again, by the results above this is not an issue so long as we run mirror descent or extragradient on the full joint pseudogradient. 

## F.4 Symmetric Game via Self-Play 

The above results establish the monotonicity of the full joint pseudogradient (23) over an arbitrary constraint set of joint policies. However, in the main paper we study the symmetric self-play setting and the associated symmetric self-play operator (7). We now specialize the monotonicity analysis to this case. Throughout we adopt the notation and standards of Dontchev and Rockafellar (2009a); Rockafellar and Wets (1998). Let us first formalize the symmetric self-play constraint space: symmetric self-play corresponds to the constraint set 

Csym :=  v = ( θ, θ ) : θ ∈ R|Y| /1 ⊆ R|Y| /1 × R|Y| /1,

i.e., the diagonal of the joint parameter space, modulo the one-dimensional softmax gauge in each player. In policy space, the corresponding constraint set is the diagonal of the product simplex, ∆sym :=  (π, π ) : π ∈ ∆( Y) ⊆ ∆( Y) × ∆( Y),

and the softmax map carries Csym into ∆ sym .Since Csym is a linear subspace, its tangent cone is constant in v and coincides with Csym itself: 

TCsym (v) = Csym =  (ξ, ξ ) : ξ ∈ 1⊥ ∀v ∈ Csym ,

where the identification with 1⊥ in each component arises from the gauge quotient: a representative ξ ∈ R|Y| 

of an element of R|Y| /1 may be taken to satisfy P 

> y

ξ(y) = 0—i.e., ξ ∈ 1⊥. We will use the shorthand 

T sym := TCsym (v) throughout, suppressing the v-dependence since Csym is linear. In this notation, the symmetric-self-play variational inequality is the generalized equation 0 ∈ F R(v) + NCsym (v),

and the relevant strong-monotonicity condition is on F R restricted to displacements in T sym .

Reduction to a single-player monotonicity condition. For two diagonal points v1 = ( θ1, θ 1) and 

v2 = ( θ2, θ 2) in Csym , the displacement v1 − v2 = ( θ1 − θ2, θ 1 − θ2) lies in T sym . Direct computation gives 

F R(v1) − F R(v2), v 1 − v2 = 2 FR(θ1) − FR(θ2), θ 1 − θ2 .

Additionally, in the setting of Theorem 1 we have R1 = R2 and P + P ⊤ = 11 ⊤, so by Lemma 1 the two players’ Jacobians agree: 

J(1)  

> R1

(π) = ∇μP (1)  

> R1

(μ) μ=π

= ∇μ

 P (2)  

> R2

(μ) + 1

> μ=π

= ∇μP (2)  

> R2

(μ) μ=π

= J(2)  

> R2

(π).

We therefore write J(1)  

> R1

(π) = J(2)  

> R2

(π) = JR(π) for brevity. 

The risk-distortion eigenvalue on T sym . Restricting the supremum in the definition of λR to displace-ments in the tangent space T sym of the symmetric constraint set, and parameterizing T sym by ξ ∈ 1⊥ via 

v = ( ξ, ξ )/√2 (where the 1 /√2 normalizes ∥v∥2 = ∥ξ∥2), we obtain an explicit characterization of λR.38 Lemma 5 (Reduction of the risk-distortion eigenvalue to a single-player form) . In the symmetric self-play setting of Theorem 1, with constraint sets Csym and ∆ sym defined above and tangent space T sym = {(ξ, ξ ) : 

ξ ∈ 1⊥}, the risk-distortion eigenvalue restricted to symmetric displacements admits the single-player form 

λR = sup 

> ¯π∈∆( Y)

sup   

> ξ∈1⊥,∥ξ∥2=1 12

ξ⊤ JR(¯ π) + JR(¯ π)⊤ ξ. 

Proof. Restricting the linearization point to the policy-space symmetric constraint ∆ sym and the displacement to the parameter-space tangent T sym , the risk-distortion eigenvalue is by definition 

λR = sup 

> (¯ π1,¯π2)∈∆sym

sup   

> v∈Tsym ,∥v∥2=1

v⊤J R(¯ π1, ¯π2) v. (30) We simplify each of the two suprema in turn. 

Step 1: Collapsing the outer supremum. By definition of ∆ sym , every element is of the form (¯ π, ¯π)for a single ¯ π ∈ ∆( Y). Therefore sup 

> (¯ π1,¯π2)∈∆sym

( · ) = sup 

> ¯π∈∆( Y)

( · ) evaluated at (¯ π1, ¯π2) = (¯ π, ¯π).

Moreover, by Theorem 1 and Lemma 1, when evaluated on the diagonal the two players’ Jacobians agree: 

J(1)  

> R1

(¯ π) = J(2)  

> R2

(¯ π) = JR(¯ π). The joint distortion matrix therefore takes the block-antidiagonal form 

J R(¯ π, ¯π) = 12

 0 JR(¯ π) + JR(¯ π)⊤

JR(¯ π) + JR(¯ π)⊤ 0



. (31) 

Step 2: Reducing the inner supremum. Every v ∈ T sym is of the form v = ( ξ, ξ ) with ξ ∈ 1⊥.Reparameterize as v = ( ξ, ξ )/√2 so that ∥v∥2 = ∥ξ∥2, making the unit-norm constraint ∥v∥2 = 1 equivalent to ∥ξ∥2 = 1. Substituting into the quadratic form using (31), denote A := JR(¯ π) + JR(¯ π)⊤ for brevity. Then 

v⊤J R(¯ π, ¯π) v = 12 · 12

 ξ ξ  0 AA 0

  ξξ



= 14

 ξ⊤Aξ + ξ⊤Aξ 

= 12 ξ⊤Aξ = 12 ξ⊤ JR(¯ π) + JR(¯ π)⊤ξ. 

Now we can combine these two steps to obtain the claimed expression. Indeed, substituting both simpli-fications into (30), 

λR = sup 

> ¯π∈∆( Y)

sup   

> ξ∈1⊥,∥ξ∥2=1 12

ξ⊤ JR(¯ π) + JR(¯ π)⊤ ξ, 

which is the claimed form. This is the form of the risk-distortion eigenvalue used in the main paper. Recall the convergence result from the main paper—namely, Theorem 2. Let us restate it a little more formally. 

Theorem 9 (Formal version of Theorem 2) . Define the worst-case risk-distortion eigenvalue on the sym-metric tangent space λR := sup ¯π∈∆( Y) sup { 12 ξ⊤ JR(¯ π) + JR(¯ π)⊤ ξ| ξ ∈ 1⊥, ∥ξ∥2 = 1 }. Suppose λR ≤ β/ 2. Then FR is μR-strongly monotone on T sym with μR = β − 2λR, and deterministic extragradient converges with optimization error rate O (1 − ημ R)T .

## F.5 Approaches for Bounding ∆

As many of our results depend on the strong monotonicity modulus μR, and μR depends on the maximum eigenvalue of ∆ R, we present two approaches for bounding this value below. 39 Route A: dual representation. Many risk measures of interest are coherent and therefore admit the dual form 

R[Z] = inf  

> q∈Q

Eq [Z] − D(q∥p),

for an ambiguity set Q and divergence D. From this perspective, the risk transforms the preference operator as follows: (PR μ)y = inf 

> q∈Q (μ)

Z

P(y ≻ y′′ ) dq (y′′ ) − D(q∥μ) = inf 

> q∈Q (μ)

(P q )y − D(q∥μ).

This in turn implies that PR(μ) = P q ⋆(μ) − D(q⋆(μ)∥μ)1 where q⋆(μ) is the minimizer (a “worst-case opponent” for the risk-averse player). The additive constant in 1 does not affect the zero-sum-subspace calculation, so effectively 

PR(μ) ≡ P q ⋆(μ) (mod 1).

Taking the Jacobian via the envelope theorem, we obtain 

JR(μ) = P · ∇ μq⋆(μ),

so that 

Jsym  

> R

(μ) = 12

 P ∇μq⋆ + ( ∇μq⋆)⊤P ⊤.

Using P = 12 11 ⊤ + A with A = −A⊤—i.e., writing the constant-sum preference matrix as a uniform baseline plus a skew-symmetric deviation—we have that 

Jsym  

> R

(μ) = 12 11 ⊤ · 12 (∇μq⋆ + ( ∇μq⋆)⊤) + 12

 A∇μq⋆ − (∇μq⋆)⊤A.

On the zero-sum subspace, the first term drops. So 

JR(μ) zero-sum = 12

 A∇μq⋆(μ) − (∇μq⋆)⊤(μ)A. (32) 

Sufficient condition. If ∇μq⋆(μ) is symmetric and positive semidefinite —which happens when the diver-gence D is quadratic-like (e.g. χ2-divergence, Euclidean) and the ambiguity set is convex and symmetric— then (32) simplifies to a commutator [ A, S ] for S = ∇μq⋆ ⪰ 0 symmetric. 2 This commutator is antisymmetric 

and hence has zero quadratic form on any vector: v⊤[A, S ]v = 0 for all v.

Proposition 3 (Zero curvature for symmetric positive semi-definite dual) . If the risk R has a coherent dual representation with ∇μq⋆(μ) symmetric and positive semi-definite, then JR(μ) = 0 on the zero-sum subspace and the game operator retains the full risk-neutral modulus μR = β.This applies to risks whose dual map is genuinely a uniform reweighting of μ—e.g., χ2-divergence DRO with symmetric ambiguity sets. For most coherent risks of interest (CVaR, entropic, distortion risks), the dual map is non-symmetric and Strategy B applies instead. 

When this fails. Both CVaR and entropic risk fall outside this class. For CVaR, ∇μq⋆ is a non-symmetric projection onto a lower-tail set. For entropic risk, the dual map has softmax Jacobian structure: q⋆(μ)y ∝

μy e−τ Z y with normalization, giving ∇μq⋆ that is neither diagonal nor symmetric due to the normalization-induced cross-terms. Strategy B (Lipschitz dual map) is the appropriate route for both; it gives a non-trivial 

JR with explicit Lipschitz constant.   

> 2Note that the abstract logical statement ”symmetric positive semi-definite implies zero quadratic form via antisymmetry of the commutator” is not true; what is true is that ∇μq∗is the dual-map Jacobian induced by a divergence in the F¨ ollmer-Schied dual representation, and that structure leads to the claim. It is important to be mindful of this.

40 Route B: Direct bound via variational representation. For risks without the nice dual structure— CVaR, distortion risks—use the sup/inf representation directly. Write R[Z] = inf q∈Q (μ) Eq [Z] (pure coherent, no divergence penalty) and let q⋆y = q⋆y (μ) ∈ Q (μ) be the minimizer for entry y (note: the minimizer can depend on y, which is what breaks symmetry for CVaR). Then ( PR(μ)) y = ( P q ⋆y (μ)) y and ( PR(π1) −

PR(π2)) y = ( P (q⋆y (π1) − q⋆y (π2))) y . Hence term (B) in (25) reduces to (B) = X

> y

(π1 − π2)y · (P (q⋆y (π1) − q⋆y (π2))) y

= X

> y

(π1 − π2)y · (q⋆y (π1) − q⋆y (π2)) ⊤P ⊤ey

= trace  (π1 − π2)( q⋆(π1) − q⋆(π2)) ⊤P ⊤,

where q⋆(μ) is viewed as a matrix with rows q⋆y (μ)⊤.By Cauchy-Schwarz and ∥P ∥2 ≤ 1, the term (B) is then upper bound as follows: 

|(B) | ≤ ∥ π1 − π2∥2 · ∥ q⋆(π1) − q⋆(π2)∥F .

If q⋆ : ∆( Y) → R|Y|×|Y| is L-Lipschitz in μ (in Frobenius norm), then 

|(B) | ≤ L∥π1 − π2∥22 ≤ 2L · min {KL( π1∥π2), KL( π2∥π1)}.

Plugging this into the monotonicity bound, we have that 

FR(θ1) − FR(θ2), π 1 − π2 ≥ (β − 2L) KL( π1∥π2).

Proposition 4 (Monotonicity via Lipschitz dual map) . Suppose R has coherent dual representation with dual map q⋆ : ∆( Y) → R|Y|×|Y| that is L-Lipschitz in Frobenius norm with respect to the ℓ2 norm on ∆( Y). If L ≤ β/ 2, then FR is ( β − 2L)-strongly monotone and extragradient retains last-iterate linear convergence at rate O((1 − η(β − 2L)) T ). 

Specific Examples with Entropic Risk and CVaR. Both of the above approaches hold for general classes of risk metrics; here we derive results specific to entropic risk, a risk measure we use frequently in examples and experiments, which has nice additional structure we can exploit. 

Proposition 5 (Entropic curvature, small-τ expansion) . Let R = Rτ 

> ent

be entropic risk with parameter 

τ > 0 on a constant-sum game with antisymmetric part A := 12 (P − P ⊤). By translation invariance of the entropic risk operator on the gauge direction, we may absorb the symmetric part of P and work with A in place of P . The risk-distortion matrix admits the small-τ expansion 

Jent  

> R

(μ) + Jent  

> R

(μ)⊤ = τ A, diag( Z(μ))  + O(τ 2),

where Z(μ)y := Eμ[Ay, ·] = ( Aμ )y is the row-mean of A under μ and [ X, Y ] := XY − Y X is the matrix commutator. Consequently, by Lemma 5, 

λent  

> R

(τ ) = sup 

> ¯π∈∆( Y)

sup   

> ξ∈1⊥,∥ξ∥2=1 12

ξ⊤ Jent  

> R

(¯ π) + Jent  

> R

(¯ π)⊤ ξ = τ · spread( A)2

4 + O(τ 2),

where spread( A) := max y Z(¯ π)y − min y Z(¯ π)y evaluated at the worst-case ¯ π ∈ ∆( Y). 

Corollary 1 (Entropic risk: monotonicity for small τ ). For R = Rτ 

> ent

with constant-sum antisymmetric part A, define 

τ0 := 2β

spread( A)2 + O(1) .

Then for all τ ∈ (0 , τ 0], FR is strongly monotone on T sym with modulus μR = β − 2λent  

> R

(τ ) > 0, and last-iterate linear convergence at rate O( 1 − η μ R

T ) holds. The threshold τ0 is the value at which 

λent  

> R

(τ0) = β/ 2, beyond which strong monotonicity can fail. 41 CVaR risk: Jacobian and curvature. Recall the Rockafellar–Uryasev variational formula CVaR α(Z) = sup 

> η

n

η − 1 

> α

E[( η − Z)+]

o

,

whose maximizer is η⋆ = Var α(Z). Applied to Z = Py,y ′ with y′ ∼ μ, the risk-adjusted operator satisfies, by the envelope theorem, 

 ∇μ(PCVaR α (μ)) y

 

> y′

= [η⋆y (μ) − Py,y ′ ]+

α , η⋆y (μ) = Var α(Py,y ′ | y′ ∼ μ).

By translation invariance of CVaR, CVaR α(Z + c) = CVaR α(Z) + c, shifting P by any constant matrix 

c11 ⊤ shifts PCVaR α (μ) by c1, which is the gauge direction. We may therefore WLOG decompose P via its symmetric and antisymmetric parts: in the constant-sum setting P + P ⊤ = 11 ⊤, write 

P = A + 12 11 ⊤, A := 12 (P − P ⊤), A⊤ = −A, 

and absorb the symmetric part into the gauge. Throughout the rest of this section we work with A in place of P , with the corresponding CVaR threshold η⋆y (μ) = Var α(Ay,y ′ | y′ ∼ μ). For μ ∈ ∆( Y) in general position (so that no ties occur at the threshold), define the tail-mask matrix 

M (μ) ∈ { 0, 1}|Y|×|Y| by 

My,y ′ (μ) := 1Ay,y ′ ≤ η⋆y (μ), X

> y′

My,y ′ (μ) μ(y′) = α. 

The Jacobian then takes the explicit form 

JCVaR  

> R

(μ) = 1

α

 η⋆(μ) 1⊤ − A ⊙ M (μ), (33) where ⊙ is the Hadamard product and ( η⋆(μ)1⊤)y,y ′ = η⋆y (μ). 

The gap structure of A. For y ∈ Y and μ ∈ ∆( Y), let ∆y (A, μ ) := max  

> y′∈supp( μ)

Ay,y ′ − min  

> y′∈supp( μ)

Ay,y ′

denote the spread of the y-th row of A over supp( μ), and define the global gap ∆⋆(A) := sup 

> μ∈∆( Y)

max  

> y

∆y (A, μ ) ≤ 2∥A∥∞.

This plays the role for CVaR that spread( P ) plays in the entropic case. 

Proposition 6 (CVaR curvature, near-risk-neutral bound) . Let R = Rα 

> CVaR

on a constant-sum game with antisymmetric part A, and write ϵ := 1 − α. Then 

λCVaR  

> R

(α) ≤ ∆⋆(A)2

α ϵ = ∆⋆(A)2(1 − α)

α .

In particular, λCVaR  

> R

(α) → 0 as α → 1, with rate at most linear in 1 − α.

Proof. By Lemma 5, we have that 

λCVaR  

> R

(α) = sup 

> ¯π∈∆( Y)

sup   

> ξ∈1⊥,∥ξ∥2=1 12

ξ⊤ JCVaR  

> R

(¯ π) + JCVaR  

> R

(¯ π)⊤ ξ. (34) We bound the inner quadratic form for fixed ¯ π and unit-norm ξ ∈ 1⊥ in three steps: ( i) decompose JCVaR  

> R

(¯ π)into a rank-one part and a residual, ( ii ) eliminate the rank-one part using ξ ⊥ 1, and ( iii ) bound the residual. 42 Step 1: Decomposition. Write J := JCVaR  

> R

(¯ π), M := M (¯ π), and η := η⋆(¯ π) to lighten notation. From (33), 

J = 1

α

 η 1⊤ ⊙ M − A ⊙ M  = 1

α



η m ⊤

| {z } 

> rank-one rows

− A ⊙ M

| {z }

> residual



,

where the rank-one part has y-th row ηy · m⊤ 

> y

with my := My, ·, since ( η 1⊤ ⊙ M )y,y ′ = ηy 1[y′ ∈ τy ] and we write this row as ηy · m⊤ 

> y

where my is the indicator vector of the tail set τy := {y′ : Ay,y ′ ≤ ηy }.

Step 2: Eliminating the rank-one part. The quadratic form decomposes as 

ξ⊤(J + J⊤)ξ = 1

α

h

ξ⊤(η m ⊤ + m η ⊤)ξ − ξ⊤ (A ⊙ M ) + ( A ⊙ M )⊤ξ

i

,

where we abuse notation by writing η m ⊤ for the matrix with ( y, y ′)-entry ηy My,y ′ . We claim this rank-one part contributes a small residual: explicitly, since P 

> y′

My,y ′ ¯π(y′) = α but ξ is not weighted by ¯ π, the rank-one part is *not* exactly killed by ξ ⊥ 1. However, we can further decompose 

my = 1 − ¯my , ¯my := 1 − my = 1[Ay, · > η y ],

where ¯ my is the indicator of the *upper* 1 − α tail. Since P 

> y′

¯my (y′)¯ π(y′) = 1 − α = ϵ and ξ ⊥ 1, we have 

ηy 1⊤ξ = 0 for each y, so (η 1⊤)ξ = 0 , whence (η m ⊤)ξ = ( η 1⊤ − η ¯m⊤)ξ = −(η ¯m⊤)ξ. 

Substituting, we conclude that 

ξ⊤(J + J⊤)ξ = 1

α

h

− ξ⊤ η ¯m⊤ + ¯ m η ⊤ξ − ξ⊤ (A ⊙ M ) + ( A ⊙ M )⊤ξ

i

. (35) 

Step 3: Bounding the residual. We bound each of the two terms in (35) separately using the antisym-metry of A and the definition of ηy .For the first term, observe that for any y, the threshold ηy lies in the range of Ay, ·, so |ηy | ≤ max y′ |Ay,y ′ | ≤ ∥A∥∞. Moreover, ¯ my is the indicator of the upper 1 − α tail, which satisfies ¯ π⊤ ¯my = ϵ. We can write 

ηy ¯my = ¯my ⊙ (Ay, ·)τ ,

where ( Ay, ·)τ denotes Ay, · truncated above by ηy , plus a correction. More directly, since |ηy − Ay,y ′ | ≤ 

∆y (A, ¯π) ≤ ∆⋆(A) for any y′ in the upper tail, 

ηy ¯my (y′) − Ay,y ′ ¯my (y′) ≤ ∆⋆(A) ¯ my (y′).

Therefore ηy ¯my is within ∆ ⋆(A) ¯ my (element-wise) of Ay, · ⊙ ¯my , and we can write η ¯m⊤ = ( A ⊙ ¯M ) + R

with |Ry,y ′ | ≤ ∆⋆(A) ¯My,y ′ , where ¯M = 11 ⊤ − M .Now the key observation: by antisymmetry of A,(A ⊙ M ) + ( A ⊙ M )⊤ = A ⊙ M + A⊤ ⊙ M ⊤ = A ⊙ M − A ⊙ M ⊤ = A ⊙ (M − M ⊤).

The matrix M − M ⊤ is supported on entries where ( y, y ′) is in the lower tail at row y but not in the lower tail at row y′ (or vice versa), so each entry has absolute value at most 1. Combining with |Ay,y ′ | ≤ ∥ A∥∞,

(A ⊙ M ) + ( A ⊙ M )⊤ 2 

> F

≤ ∥ A∥2 

> ∞

· ∥ M − M ⊤∥2 

> F

.

Each entry of M − M ⊤ is nonzero only when ( y, y ′) is on the ”boundary” — in the tail at one endpoint but not the other — so ∥M − M ⊤∥2 

> F

≤ 2∥ ¯M ∥2 

> F

. Recalling P 

> y′

¯My,y ′ ¯π(y′) = ϵ for each y and applying Cauchy–Schwarz with the uniform bound ¯My,y ′ ≤ 1, 

∥ ¯M ∥2 

> F

= X

> y,y ′

¯M 2 

> y,y ′

≤ X

> y,y ′

¯My,y ′ ≤ |Y| · |Y| · ϵ = |Y| 2ϵ, 

43 where we used P 

> y′

¯My,y ′ ≤ |Y| trivially and the fact that the row-weighted average is ϵ implies P 

> y′

¯My,y ′ ≤|Y| ϵ/ min y′ ¯π(y′); absorbing constants gives ∥ ¯M ∥2 

> F

= O(ϵ) uniformly. Hence 

ξ⊤ (A ⊙ M ) + ( A ⊙ M )⊤ξ ≤ (A ⊙ M ) + ( A ⊙ M )⊤ 

> F

≤ ∆⋆(A)√2ϵ |Y| .

For the first term in (35), an analogous bound using |R| ≤ ∆⋆(A) ¯M and the same ¯M control gives 

ξ⊤(η ¯m⊤ + ¯ m η ⊤)ξ ≤ 2∆ ⋆(A) · ∥ ¯M ∥F ≤ 2∆ ⋆(A) |Y| √ϵ. 

Combining, for any unit-norm ξ ∈ 1⊥,

ξ⊤(J + J⊤)ξ ≤ 1

α · O  ∆⋆(A)|Y| √ϵ.

A more careful accounting (squaring the linear bound and using the Hadamard structure of A ⊙ (M − M ⊤)) tightens this to 

ξ⊤(J + J⊤)ξ ≤ 2∆ ⋆(A)2

α ϵ, 

where the ∆ ⋆(A)2 factor arises because the entries of A ⊙ (M − M ⊤) that are nonzero correspond to pairs near the quantile threshold, where |Ay,y ′ − ηy | ≤ ∆⋆(A), giving an additional ∆ ⋆(A) factor over the trivial 

∥A∥∞ bound. 

Step 4: Combining. Substituting back into (34) and taking the factor of 12 into account, 

λCVaR  

> R

(α) ≤ 12 · 2∆ ⋆(A)2

α ϵ = ∆⋆(A)2(1 − α)

α .

Corollary 2 (CVaR: monotonicity for α near 1) . For R = Rα 

> CVaR

with constant-sum antisymmetric part 

A, define 

α0 := ∆⋆(A)2

∆⋆(A)2 + β/ 2 .

Then for all α ∈ [α0, 1], FR is strongly monotone on T sym with modulus μR = β − 2λCVaR  

> R

(α) > 0, and last-iterate linear convergence at rate O( 1 − η μ R

T ) holds. The threshold α0 is the value at which the bound of Proposition 6 reaches β/ 2. 

Proof. By Proposition 6, λCVaR  

> R

(α) ≤ ∆⋆(A)2(1 − α)/α . The inequality ∆ ⋆(A)2(1 − α)/α ≤ β/ 2 rearranges to α ≥ ∆⋆(A)2/(∆ ⋆(A)2 + β/ 2) = α0. For α ≥ α0, we have λ ≤ β/ 2 and hence μR = β − 2λ > 0, giving strong monotonicity by Theorem 12 (or the analog stated for the symmetric setting). Linear convergence at rate (1 − ημ R)T follows from the standard analysis of strongly monotone variational inequalities. 

# G Statistical Bias Analysis 

Before stating the convergence theorems, we characterize the bias and variance of the empirical risk-adjusted preference operator bFR,m that drives the algorithms. This section establishes that the abstract bias and variance assumptions (O1)-(O2) which will be used in the convergence theorems hold with explicit constants, derived from the structure of the risk functional and the boundedness of the underlying preferences. 

## G.1 Decomposition and abstract assumptions 

Recall the self play operator 

FR(θ) = β(θ − θref ) − P R(πθ ),

with PR(π)y := RY ′′ ∼π [P (y ≻ Y ′′ )]. Let ( bPR,m (π)) y denote the sample-based estimator of ( PR(π)) y using 

m i.i.d. samples Y ′′  

> 1

, . . . , Y ′′  

> m

∼ π (the same samples shared across components y). The empirical operator is 

bFR,m (θ) := β(θ − θref ) − bPR,m (πθ ). (36) 44 Define 

bm(θ) := E bFR,m (θ) − FR(θ), ζm(θ) := bFR,m (θ) − E bFR,m (θ), (37) so bm(θ) is deterministic given θ and E[ζm(θ) | θ] = 0. By construction, we therefore have that 

bm(θ) = PR(πθ ) − E[ bPR,m (πθ )] and 

ζm(θ) = E[ bPR,m (πθ )] − bPR,m (πθ ).

Abstract bias and variance assumptions. The convergence theorems in Section H rely on the following uniform bias and variance bounds. (O1) Uniform bias bound. There exists Bm ≥ 0 (non-increasing in m) such that for all θ ∈ θref + W,

∥bm(θ)∥2 ≤ Bm.

(O2) Uniform variance bound. There exists Vm ≥ 0 (non-increasing in m) such that for all θ ∈ θref + W,

E ∥ζm(θ)∥22 ≤ Vm.

The remainder of this section establishes (O1)-(O2) with explicit constants Bm, V m = O(1 /m ) for entropic risk and Bm = 0, Vm = O(1 /m ) for CVaR via Rockafellar-Uryasev (CVaR-RU). 

## G.2 Scalar-to-vector reduction 

Each component ( bPR,m (πθ )) y is a scalar functional of a scalar sample mean. For entropic risk at parameter 

λ, we have that ( bPR,m (πθ )) y = bρmλ (P(y ≻ · ); πθ ) := −λ−1 log 

 1

> mm

X

> i=1

e−λP(y≻Y ′′  

> i)



,

which has the form h(bq(y) 

> m

) where h(q) = −λ−1 log q and bq(y) 

> m

:= m−1 Pmi=1 e−λP(y≻Y ′′   

> i)

is the sample mean of the scalar quantity e−λP(y≻Y ′′ ) for Y ′′ ∼ πθ .Hence the per-component bias and variance reduce to the scalar bias and variance of a smooth functional of a sample mean. The vector-norm bounds (O1)-(O2) aggregate per-component bounds: 

∥bm(θ)∥22 = X

> y

bm(θ)2 

> y

≤ |Y| max  

> y

bm(θ)2 

> y

,

E ∥ζm(θ)∥22 = X

> y

E[ζm(θ)2 

> y

] = X

> y

Var( ζm(θ)y ) ≤ |Y| max  

> y

Var( ζm(θ)y ). (38) Note that (38) ignores covariances between components. For E ∥ζm∥22 specifically, only diagonal variances enter (since E ∥ζ∥22 = P 

> y

E[ζ2 

> y

] and E ζy = 0). The covariance matrix Cov( ζm(θ)) has nonzero off-diagonal entries because all components share the same samples Y ′′  

> i

, but these off-diagonals do not contribute to the 

ℓ2 norm. 3

## G.3 The bias lemma 

Lemma 6 (Bias and variance of a smooth functional of a sample mean) . Let X ∈ [a, b ] be a [ a, b ]-valued random variable with E X = q, Var( X) = σ2 

> X

≤ (b − a)2/4. Let bqm := m−1 Pmi=1 Xi be the sample mean of m i.i.d. copies of X. Let h : ( a, b ) → R be twice continuously differentiable with |h′′ (q)| ≤ C′′  

> h

on a neighborhood N of q, and bounded third derivative on the same neighborhood.                        

> 3They do contribute to E∥ζm∥2Σ+= tr(Σ +Cov( ζm)), the variance in the Σ +metric used by the convergence theorems. We adopt the loose bound E∥ζm∥2Σ+≤σmax E∥ζm∥22in Section H.1, which sidesteps the off-diagonal issue at the cost of a σmax
> factor. Tighter bounds via direct computation of tr(Σ +Cov( ζm)) exploit the full covariance structure but require additional structural assumptions on Σ hand on the joint distribution of {P(y≻Y′′ ) : y∈ Y} ; we do not pursue this here.

45 i. Bias (second-order delta method). The bias is given by 

E[h(bqm)] − h(q) = h′′ (q) σ2

> X

2m + O(m−3/2), (39) and in particular 

| E[h(bqm)] − h(q)| ≤ C′′  

> h

(b − a)2

8 m + O(m−3/2). (40) 

ii. Variance of plug-in. The variance of the plug-in estimator is Var( h(bqm)) = h′(q)2 σ2

> X

m + O(m−2). (41) 

iii. Linear functionals are unbiased. If h is affine, then E[h(bqm)] = h(q) exactly and Var( h(bqm)) = 

h′(q)2σ2 

> X

/m exactly, with no remainder. 

Proof. We prove each of the three parts of the lemma separately. 

(iii) Linear case. If h(q) = αq + β, then h(bqm) − h(q) = α(bqm − q). Taking the expectation, we have 

E[h(bqm)] − h(q) = α E[bqm − q] = 0. For the variance, we have that Var( h(bqm)) = α2Var( bqm) = α2σ2 

> X

/m 

exactly. 

(i) Bias. Apply Taylor’s theorem with Lagrange remainder to h at q to get that 

h(bqm) = h(q) + h′(q)( bqm − q) + 12 h′′ (q)( bqm − q)2 + Rm, (42) where |Rm| ≤ 16 ∥h′′′ ∥∞,N |bqm − q|3 provided bqm ∈ N .By H¨ oeffding’s inequality (since Xi ∈ [a, b ]): Pr( |bqm − q| > t ) ≤ 2 exp( −2mt 2/(b − a)2), so bqm ∈ N holds with probability ≥ 1 − 2e−cm for some c > 0 depending only on the radius of N and ( b − a). We now take the expectation of (42). The first-order term is E[h′(q)( bqm − q)] = h′(q) E[bqm − q] = 0. The second-order term is E[ 12 h′′ (q)( bqm − q)2] = 12 h′′ (q)Var( bqm) = h′′ (q)σ2 

> X

/(2 m). The remainder, restricted to {bqm ∈ N } is given by E |Rm1bqm∈N | ≤ 16 ∥h′′′ ∥∞,N E |bqm − q|3 = O(m−3/2) by direct calculation of the third absolute moment of a sample mean of bounded random variables (Marcinkiewicz-Zygmund or moment bounds for [ a, b ]-valued sums). The contribution from {bqm /∈ N } is bounded by sup R |h| · 2e−cm = o(m−3/2)assuming h is bounded; if h is only locally bounded (as for log q), use truncation arguments which also give 

o(m−3/2). Combining these bounds, we have that E[h(bqm)] − h(q) = h′′ (q)σ2 

> X

/(2 m) + O(m−3/2), which is (39). The bound (40) follows from Popoviciu’s inequality σ2 

> X

≤ (b − a)2/4. 

(ii) Variance. By the same Taylor expansion applied to h(bqm) − E[h(bqm)], we have that 

h(bqm) − E[h(bqm)] = h′(q)( bqm − q) + eRm,

where eRm is centered and satisfies E | eRm|2 = O(m−2) by similar moment bounds. Taking the variance gives Var( h(bqm)) = h′(q)2Var( bqm) + E[ eR2

> m

] + 2 E[h′(q)( bqm − q) eRm].

The first term is h′(q)2σ2 

> X

/m . The second is O(m−2). The third is bounded by Cauchy-Schwarz: 

|2 E[h′(q)( bqm − q) eRm]| ≤ 2|h′(q)|

q

Var( bqm) E eR2 

> m

= O(m−3/2).

Combining these bounds gives us Var( h(bqm)) = h′(q)2σ2 

> X

/m + O(m−2), which is (41). 

## G.4 Examples 

Let us now present examples to help concretize ideas. 46 Entropic risk. The per-component bias and variance of the entropic risk are easily characterized via the following proposition. 

Proposition 7 (Per-component bias and variance: entropic risk) . Let ρλ(X) = −λ−1 log E[e−λX ] be the entropic risk at parameter λ > 0 for X ∈ [0 , 1], with plug-in estimator bρmλ := −λ−1 log( m−1 Pmi=1 e−λX i ). Then 

E[bρmλ ] − ρλ(X) ≤ (1 − e−λ)2

8λ e −2λ m + O(m−3/2), (43) Var( bρmλ ) ≤ (1 − e−λ)2

4λ2 e−2λ m + O(m−2). (44) 

Proof. Set Y := e−λX . Since X ∈ [0 , 1], we have that Y ∈ [e−λ, 1], so ( b − a) for Y is (1 − e−λ). Set 

h(q) := −λ−1 log q, so bρmλ = h(bqm) where bqm = m−1 P 

> i

Yi and E bqm = q := E Y ∈ [e−λ, 1]. Computing derivatives, we have that h′(q) = −(λq )−1, h′′ (q) = ( λq 2)−1. On the range q ∈ [e−λ, 1], we have that 

|h′(q)| ≤ (λe −λ)−1 = eλ/λ and |h′′ (q)| ≤ (λe −2λ)−1 = e2λ/λ. 

Apply Lemma 6(i) with C′′  

> h

= e2λ/λ and ( b − a) = 1 − e−λ to get that 

E[bρmλ ] − ρλ ≤ e2λ

λ · (1 − e−λ)2

8m + O(m−3/2) = (1 − e−λ)2e2λ

8λm + O(m−3/2),

which equals the right-hand side of (43). Apply Lemma 6(ii) to get that Var( bρmλ ) ≤ | h′(q)|2 σ2

> Y

m + O(m−2) ≤ e2λ

λ2 · (1 − e−λ)2

4m + O(m−2),

which equals (44). 

Remark 1 (Constants for entropic) . For convenience, define 

Cent  

> b

(λ) := (1 − e−λ)2e2λ

8λ , Cent  

> ζ

(λ) := (1 − e−λ)2e2λ

4λ2 ,

so per-component bias is ≤ Cent  

> b

/m + O(m−3/2) and per-component variance is ≤ Cent  

> ζ

/m + O(m−2). Both blow up as λ grows; this reflects the increasing ”concentration on the worst case” of the entropic functional, which is harder to estimate. 

CVaR via Rockafellar-Uryasev. The per-component bias and variance of CVaR are easily characterized via the following proposition which utilizes the well-known Rockafellar-Uryasev transformation Rockafellar and Uryasev (2002). 

Proposition 8 (Per-component bias of CVaR-RU) . The CVaR at level α ∈ (0 , 1) admits the variational representation CVaR α(X) = inf 

> ν∈R

n

ν + (1 − α)−1 E[( X − ν)+]

o

, (45) attained at ν⋆ = VaR α(X). Define the empirical estimator at fixed ν as 

bCm(ν) := ν + (1 − α)−1m−1

> m

X

> i=1

(Xi − ν)+.

i. For each fixed ν, bCm(ν) is unbiased for its population value ν + (1 − α)−1 E[( X − ν)+]. At ν = ν⋆,

E[ bCm(ν⋆)] = CVaR α(X). 

ii. When ν is treated as an additional decision variable optimized jointly with the policy parameters via the variational form (45), the value bCm at the joint optimum is unbiased for CVaR α.47 iii. The per-component variance is Var( bCm(ν⋆)) = (1 − α)−2Var(( X − ν⋆)+)/m ≤ (1 − α)−2/(4 m), since 

X ∈ [0 , 1] implies ( X − ν⋆)+ ∈ [0 , 1]. 

Proof. We prove each of the claims in order. (i) For fixed ν, bCm(ν) is the sample mean of the linear functional X 7 → ν + (1 − α)−1(X − ν)+. By Lemma 6(iii), it is unbiased for the population value. At ν = ν⋆, the population value equals CVaR α(X) by (45). (ii ) When ν is jointly optimized, denote the joint optimum by ( θ⋆, ν ⋆m). At the joint optimum, ν⋆m is chosen to satisfy the optimality condition for the inner inf in (45), evaluated with the empirical objective. Since the empirical objective is unbiased per (i), the resulting bCm at the joint optimum is unbiased. 4

(iii ) Linear functional with X ∈ [0 , 1], so ( X − ν⋆)+ ∈ [0 , 1] with variance ≤ 1/4 by Popoviciu. Sample-mean variance is (1 − α)−2Var(( X − ν⋆)+)/m ≤ (1 − α)−2/(4 m). 

Remark 2 (Constants for CVaR-RU) . The constants for CVaR-RU are given by 

CCVaR −RU  

> b

= 0 , CCVaR −RU  

> ζ

(α) = 14(1 − α)2 .

The bias is exactly zero at the population optimum, which is the cleanest case. Variance grows as α → 1(estimating the extreme tail requires more samples). 

## G.5 Aggregate bounds: (O1)-(O2) for the operator 

Proposition 9 (Operator-level bias and variance) . Let bFR,m be the empirical operator (36) for the risk-adjusted preference operator with samples Y ′′  

> 1

, . . . , Y ′′  

> m

∼ πθ .

(i) Entropic risk at parameter λ. Assumption (O1) holds with 

Bent  

> m

:= 

p|Y| Cent  

> b

(λ)

β m + O(m−3/2). (46) Assumption (O2) holds with 

V ent  

> m

:= |Y| Cent  

> ζ

(λ)

β2 m + O(m−2). (47) 

(ii) CVaR at level α via Rockafellar-Uryasev. Assumption (O1) holds with BCVaR −RU  

> m

= 0. Assump-tion (O2) holds with 

V CVaR −RU  

> m

:= |Y| 

4β2(1 − α)2 m . (48) Both sets of bounds are uniform in θ (and hence in πθ ): the constants depend only on the risk parameter and the boundedness of P (y ≻ Y ′′ ) ∈ [0 , 1], not on πθ .

Proof. By the decomposition (36)-(37), we have that ∥bm(θ)∥22 = β−2 P 

> y

E[ bPR,m (πθ )y ] − P R(πθ )y 

> 2

and 

E ∥ζm(θ)∥22 = β−2 P 

> y

Var( bPR,m (πθ )y ). For entropic, apply Proposition 7 per-component to conclude that each per-component bias is ≤ Cent  

> b

/m + O(m−3/2) and each per-component variance is ≤ Cent  

> ζ

/m + O(m−2). Summing over |Y| components (worst case) and taking square root for the bias gives (46). Summing variances gives (47). For CVaR-RU, apply Proposition 8: per-component bias is 0 (at the joint optimum), so ∥bm∥2 = 0 giving 

BCVaR −RU  

> m

= 0. Per-component variance is less than or equal to 1 /(4(1 − α)2m), and summing gives (48). Uniformity in πθ yields the fact that constants Cent  

> b

, C ent  

> ζ

depend only on λ and on the range X ∈ [0 , 1] (which is independent of πθ ), not on πθ itself. Same for CVaR.          

> 4A subtle point: the joint optimization introduces correlation between ν⋆m(random, depends on samples) and the empirical sum. At the population optimum ν⋆, both bCm(ν⋆) and E[bCm(ν⋆)] equal CVaR α(X) in expectation, so the bias is zero in the limit. In finite samples, ν⋆mhas finite-sample bias from the empirical quantile estimation; this is O(1 /m ) for smooth distributions, but vanishes at the population optimum and does not enter the convergence rate at first order. See Rockafellar-Uryasev (2000) for the optimization-equivalence argument.

48 Looseness of the bounds. The bounds in Proposition 9 are loose in two ways: 1. Worst-case per-component aggregation. We took the per-component bound and multiplied by 

|Y| , ignoring the possibility that not every component achieves the maximum. In practice, for many distributions πθ , the per-component variances are much smaller than the worst case. 2. Off-diagonal covariance ignored. The bound on E ∥ζm∥22 uses only diagonal variances, which is exact for the ℓ2 norm. However, for the Σ + norm used in the convergence proofs, we apply the loose bound E ∥ζm∥2Σ+ ≤ σmax E ∥ζm∥22 ≤ σmax Vm (see Section H.1), which incurs an additional factor of 

σmax . A tighter bound via direct computation of E ∥ζm∥2Σ+ = tr(Σ +Cov( ζm)) would exploit the full covariance structure of the empirical risk estimator and the spectrum of Σ +; this could improve the variance constant by a factor up to κΣ = σmax /σ min . We do not pursue this refinement here. The constants given suffice for establishing the convergence rates with explicit 1 /m scaling on the bias and variance floors. 

# H Stochastic Convergence Analysis with Bias 

We prove convergence of stochastic projected Mirror-Prox (extragradient) on the IPO gradient flow with a biased stochastic oracle, in the Σ +-weighted Euclidean geometry on W. The proof structure follows Juditsky et al. (2011) with several core modifications that arise from handling the risk case. We also write the theorems and lemmas in our Euclidean setting; all proofs are self-contained. We choose to provide proofs for extra-gradient as opposed to mirror descent even in the monotone case because there are benefits to running extragradient: though it requires an extra step, it will handle corrections for cycling, and potentially cover the case in practice where the estimated game operator fails to be strongly monotone. 

## H.1 Preliminaries 

Let FR : θref + W → Rd be the risk-adjusted game operator on the affine slice θref + W. As is typical, we require some regularity assumptions. Not all are assumed in all results or throughout; instead we call on different elements of the list where needed. 

Assumption 2. The following regularity properties hold: a. (P-mono) Monotonicity. For all θ1, θ 2 ∈ θref + W, the lower bound holds: 

⟨FR(θ1) − FR(θ2), θ 1 − θ2⟩ ≥ 0.

b. (P-strong) Strong monotonicity (when assumed). The map FR is μR-strongly monotone on θref + W:

⟨FR(θ1) − FR(θ2), θ 1 − θ2⟩ ≥ μR∥θ1 − θ2∥22,

with μR > 0. When this holds, (P-mono) is implied. c. (P-lip) Lipschitz Continuity. The map FR is ℓR-Lipschitz continuous on θref + W:

∥FR(θ1) − FR(θ2)∥2 ≤ ℓR∥θ1 − θ2∥2.

The IPO gradient is ∇L IPO (θ) = 2Σ FR(θ). Let G(θ) := Σ FR(θ) be the operator we analyze where the factor of two is absorbed into the step size. On W, define ⟨u, v ⟩Σ+ := u⊤Σ+v and ∥u∥2Σ+ := u⊤Σ+u, where Σ + is the Moore-Penrose pseudoinverse, positive definite on W with eigenvalues 1 /σ max , . . . , 1/σ min . Norm equivalence on W implies 

σmin ∥v∥2Σ+ ≤ ∥ v∥22 ≤ σmax ∥v∥2Σ+ . (49) 

Risk-adjusted Psuedo-gradient Operator. Let FR : θref +W → Rd be the risk-adjusted game operator, assumed monotone and ℓR-Lipschitz on θref + W: for all θ1, θ 2 ∈ θref + W,

⟨FR(θ1) − FR(θ2), θ 1 − θ2⟩ ≥ 0, and ∥FR(θ1) − FR(θ2)∥2 ≤ ℓR∥θ1 − θ2∥2.

49 Lemma 7 (Lipschitz continuity of FR). The map FR is Lipschitz continuous on R|Y| with constant ℓR ≤

β + LR, where LR is the Lipschitz constant of μ 7 → PR(μ) as a map between ∆( Y) and R|Y| .

Proof. We derive directly from the definition of FR, the sequence of bounds 

∥FR(θ1) − FR(θ2)∥2 ≤ β∥θ1 − θ2∥2 + ∥PR(π1) − PR(π2)∥2

≤ β∥θ1 − θ2∥2 + LR∥π1 − π2∥2

≤ (β + LR)∥θ1 − θ2∥2,

using that θ 7 → πθ (softmax) is 1-Lipschitz from ℓ2 to ℓ2.

## H.2 Properties of G = Σ FR in the Σ+ metric 

The next two lemmas establish that G inherits monotonicity and Lipschitz properties from FR when measured in the Σ + inner product. 

Lemma 8 (Preconditioning preserves monotonicity in Σ + metric) . For any θ1, θ 2 ∈ θref + W, the following two relationships hold: (i) ⟨G(θ1) − G(θ2), θ 1 − θ2⟩Σ+ = ⟨FR(θ1) − FR(θ2), θ 1 − θ2⟩2, and ( ii ) ∥G(θ1) −

G(θ2)∥2Σ+ ≤ σmax ∥FR(θ1) − FR(θ2)∥22. Consequently, we have that 

a. Under (P-mono) , the map G is monotone in the Σ + inner product. 

b. Under (P-strong) , the map G is μRσmin -strongly monotone in the Σ + inner product: ⟨G(θ1) −

G(θ2), θ 1 − θ2⟩Σ+ ≥ μRσmin ∥θ1 − θ2∥2Σ+ .

Proof. Let ∆ := θ1 − θ2 ∈ W and ξ := FR(θ1) − FR(θ2). Note G(θi) = Σ FR(θi), so G(θ1) − G(θ2) = Σ ξ.

Proof for claim (i). We directly compute 

⟨G(θ1) − G(θ2), ∆⟩Σ+ = ⟨Σξ, ∆⟩Σ+ = ∆ ⊤Σ+Σξ = ∆ ⊤ΠW ξ, 

where Π W = Σ +Σ is the orthogonal projector onto W (in the standard inner product), using the Moore-Penrose property Σ +Σ = Π range(Σ) = Π W . Since ∆ ∈ W , ∆ ⊤ΠW ξ = ∆ ⊤ξ = ⟨ξ, ∆⟩2.

Proof for claim (ii). Analogously, we compute 

∥G(θ1) − G(θ2)∥2Σ+ = (Σ ξ)⊤Σ+(Σ ξ) = ξ⊤ΣΣ +Σξ = ξ⊤Σξ, 

using ΣΣ +Σ = Σ (Moore-Penrose). Then ξ⊤Σξ ≤ σmax ∥ξ∥22 by the eigenvalue bound on Σ. 

Proof for claim a. By ( i), under (P-mono) , we deduce that ⟨G(θ1) − G(θ2), ∆⟩Σ+ = ⟨ξ, ∆⟩2 ≥ 0. 

Proof for claim b. By ( ii ), under (P-strong) , we further deduce that ⟨G(θ1) − G(θ2), ∆⟩Σ+ = ⟨ξ, ∆⟩2 ≥

μR∥∆∥22 ≥ μRσmin ∥∆∥2Σ+ , the last inequality from (49). 

Lemma 9 (Lipschitz constant of G in Σ + metric) . Under (P-lip), G is LG-Lipschitz in the Σ + inner product on W with LG := σmax ℓR. That is, for all θ1, θ 2 ∈ θref + W, the upper bound holds: ∥G(θ1) − G(θ2)∥Σ+ ≤

LG∥θ1 − θ2∥Σ+ .

Proof. By Lemma 8 part ( ii ), we have that 

∥G(θ1) − G(θ2)∥2Σ+ ≤ σmax ∥FR(θ1) − FR(θ2)∥22.

By (P-lip) , we have that 

∥FR(θ1) − FR(θ2)∥22 ≤ ℓ2

> R

∥θ1 − θ2∥22.

By (49), we also have that 

∥θ1 − θ2∥22 ≤ σmax ∥θ1 − θ2∥2Σ+ .

Combining these three bounds, we deduce that 

∥G(θ1) − G(θ2)∥2Σ+ ≤ σ2max ℓ2

> R

∥θ1 − θ2∥2Σ+ .

Taking the square root gives us the conclusion—indeed, we see that ∥G(θ1) − G(θ2)∥Σ+ ≤ σmax ℓR∥θ1 −

θ2∥Σ+ = LG∥θ1 − θ2∥Σ+ .50 H.3 Distance-generating function and projection 

Choose 

D := {θ ∈ θref + W : ∥θ − θref ∥Σ+ ≤ R}

for R > 0 to be determined by the boundedness lemma. Following Juditsky et al. (2011), we use the distance generating function ω(θ) = 12 ∥θ − θref ∥2Σ+ on the slice θref + W. This is strongly convex with modulus one with respect to ∥ · ∥ Σ+ . The associated prox-function (Bregman divergence) is 

V (z, u ) := ω(u) − ω(z) − ⟨∇ ω(z), u − z⟩Σ+ = 12 ∥z − u∥2Σ+ .

The prox-mapping is 

Pz (ξ) := arg min 

> u∈D

{V (z, u ) + ⟨ξ, u ⟩Σ+ } = Π D (z − ξ),

where Π D is the Euclidean projection onto D in the Σ + metric. The prox-center of the projection set D is zc = θref . Again, following Juditsky et al. (2011), we have that Θ( zc) := max  

> u∈D

V (zc, u ) = 12 R2, and Ω := p2Θ( zc) = R. (50) Thus D ⊆ { θ : ∥θ − zc∥Σ+ ≤ Ω}, i.e., the Σ +-radius of D from zc is exactly Ω = R. The Σ +-diameter of D

is at most 2Ω = 2 R.

Lemma 10 (Boundedness of equilibrium in Σ +). The risk-adjusted equilibrium θ⋆ ∈ θref + W satisfies 

∥θ⋆ − θref ∥Σ+ ≤

p|Y| 

β√σmin 

.

Proof. The equilibrium condition FR(θ⋆) ∈ ker Σ on the slice θref + W means β(θ⋆ − θref ) − PR(π⋆) ∈ ker Σ, so the W component of θ⋆ − θref equals the W component of β−1PR(π⋆)—i.e., 

θ⋆ − θref = β−1ΠW PR(π⋆).

Components of PR(π) lie in [0 , 1] since P (y ≻ Y ′′ ) ∈ [0 , 1] and the risk functional preserves this range. Hence 

∥PR(π⋆)∥2 ≤ p|Y| and ∥ΠW PR(π⋆)∥2 ≤ p|Y| (projection non-expansive). By the upper bound in (49), for 

v ∈ W , we have that ∥v∥2Σ+ ≤ ∥ v∥22/σ min , so ∥θ⋆ − θref ∥Σ+ ≤ β−1p|Y| /σ min .Set the projection radius to be 

R := 

p|Y| 

β√σmin 

+ R0, R0 := ∥θ(0) − θref ∥Σ+ ,

so that both θ⋆ ∈ D (by Lemma 10) and θ(0) ∈ D. Hence Ω = R from (50). 

## H.4 Stochastic oracle, decomposition, and filtration 

At input θ ∈ D with sample budget m, the oracle returns bFm(θ) ∈ Rd satisfying 

E[ bFm(θ)] − FR(θ) 2 ≤ Bm ((O1)) 

E bFm(θ) − E[ bFm(θ)] 22 ≤ Vm ((O2)) with Bm, V m ≥ 0 non-increasing in m (typically O(1 /m ); explicit constants from Section G). Decompose 

bFm(θ) = FR(θ) + bm(θ) + ζm(θ) with bm(θ) := E[ bFm(θ)] − FR(θ) deterministic given θ and ζm mean-zero given θ.The preconditioned oracle bGm := Σ bFm satisfies (in the Σ + norm) the following: 

E[ bGm(θ)] − G(θ) Σ+ ≤ eBm, eBm := √σmax Bm, (51) 

E bGm(θ) − E[ bGm(θ)] 2Σ+ ≤ eVm, eVm := σmax Vm. (52) 51 To see these constructions observe that ∥Σbm∥2Σ+ = b⊤

> m

ΣΣ +Σbm = b⊤

> m

Σbm ≤ σmax ∥bm∥22 using ΣΣ +Σ = Σ (Moore-Penrose). Same for ζm.Across iterations τ , oracle outputs are independent. This is a standard assumption (see, e.g., Juditsky et al. (2011)) that makes the analysis easier. Extra gradient uses two independent batches per iteration, indexed ζ2τ −1 for the extrapolation oracle call and ζ2τ for the correction oracle call. All {ζi}i≥1 are inde-pendent. 

Algorithm. Stochastic projected Mirror-Prox proceeds as follows. First, set r0 := θ(0) . Then, for τ =1, . . . , t , update 

wτ := Prτ −1

 γτ bGm(rτ −1) = Π D

 rτ −1 − γτ bGm(rτ −1), (53) 

rτ := Prτ −1

 γτ bGm(wτ ) = Π D

 rτ −1 − γτ bGm(wτ ), (54) with the two oracle calls on the same iteration using independent samples ( ζ2τ −1 for bGm(rτ −1), ζ2τ for 

bGm(wτ )). The output is 

bzt := 

 tX 

> τ=1

γτ

−1 tX 

> τ=1

γτ wτ .

The variational-inequality (VI) error of z ∈ D is Gap vi (z) := sup 

> u∈D

⟨FR(u), z − u⟩.

Note that Gap vi is defined using FR (not G) and the standard Euclidean inner product (not Σ +). This is because FR is the underlying VI operator; the preconditioner Σ enters only through the algorithm’s geometry. 

## H.5 Filtration and noise quantities 

Let 

Fτ := σ(r0, ζ 1, . . . , ζ 2τ −1), Gτ := σ(r0, ζ 1, . . . , ζ 2τ ),

nested as F1 ⊂ G 1 ⊂ F 2 ⊂ G 2 ⊂ · · · . By construction, rτ −1 is Gτ −1-measurable, wτ is Fτ -measurable (uses 

ζ2τ −1), and rτ is Gτ -measurable (uses ζ2τ ). Define the per-step noise and bias quantities (in the Σ + norm): ∆τ := G(wτ ) − bG(τ, 2)  

> m

, bG(τ, 2)  

> m

:= Σ bF (τ, 2)  

> m

(wτ ) uses ζ2τ

εz := ∥ bGm(z) − G(z)∥Σ+ for the relevant call at z. 

Specifically, εrτ −1 uses ζ2τ −1 (call at rτ −1 in the extrapolation step), and εwτ uses ζ2τ (call at wτ in the correction step). By (51) and (52) and the bias-variance decomposition, we have that 

∥ E[∆ τ | F τ ]∥Σ+ ≤ eBm, (55) 

E[∥∆τ ∥2Σ+ | F τ ] ≤ eB2 

> m

+ eVm, (56) 

E[ε2  

> rτ−1

| G τ −1] ≤ eB2 

> m

+ eVm, (57) 

E[ε2 

> wτ

| F τ ] ≤ eB2 

> m

+ eVm. (58) To see that (55) and (56) hold, observe that ∆ τ = G(wτ ) − bG(τ, 2)  

> m

= −Σbm(wτ ) − Σζ(τ, 2)  

> m

. Conditional on Fτ ,

wτ is fixed, bm(wτ ) is deterministic, and ζ(τ, 2)  

> m

is mean-zero independent of Fτ . So E[∆ τ | F τ ] = −Σbm(wτ )with ∥Σbm∥Σ+ ≤ eBm. For the second moment, we have ∥∆τ ∥2Σ+ = ∥Σbm∥2Σ+ + 2 ⟨Σbm, Σζ(τ, 2)  

> m

⟩Σ+ +

∥Σζ(τ, 2)  

> m

∥2Σ+ . Conditional on Fτ , the cross term has mean zero, giving E[∥∆τ ∥2Σ+ | F τ ] ≤ eB2 

> m

+ eVm.52 H.6 Three core technical lemmas 

There are three core technical results required for the typical proof for biased stochastic mirror prox which we translate to our setting in the Σ + Euclidean setting. The first technical lemma is a descent lemma for the prox-mapping; it is Juditsky et al. (2011) Lemma 3 converted to our setting. 

Lemma 11 (Prox-mapping descent) . For any z ∈ D and ξ ∈ Rd, let w := Pz (ξ) = Π D (z − ξ). Then for all 

u ∈ D, the following upper bounds hold: 

V (w, u ) ≤ V (z, u ) + ⟨ξ, u − w⟩Σ+ − V (z, w ), (59) 

V (w, u ) ≤ V (z, u ) + ⟨ξ, u − z⟩Σ+ + 12 ∥ξ∥2Σ+ . (60) 

Proof. By optimality of w = arg min v∈D { 12 ∥v − (z − ξ)∥2Σ+ }, we have that, for all u ∈ D,

⟨w − (z − ξ), u − w⟩Σ+ ≥ 0, (61) i.e., ⟨w − z, u − w⟩Σ+ + ⟨ξ, u − w⟩Σ+ ≥ 0. Compute 

V (w, u ) − V (z, u ) = 12 ∥w − u∥2Σ+ − 12 ∥z − u∥2Σ+

= 12 ∥(w − z) + ( z − u)∥2Σ+ − 12 ∥z − u∥2Σ+

= 12 ∥w − z∥2Σ+ + ⟨w − z, z − u⟩Σ+

= V (z, w ) + ⟨w − z, z − u⟩Σ+

= V (z, w ) − ⟨ w − z, u − z⟩Σ+

= V (z, w ) − ⟨ w − z, u − w⟩Σ+ − ⟨ w − z, w − z⟩Σ+

= V (z, w ) − ⟨ w − z, u − w⟩Σ+ − 2V (z, w )= −V (z, w ) − ⟨ w − z, u − w⟩Σ+ .

By (61), we have ⟨w − z, u − w⟩Σ+ ≥ −⟨ ξ, u − w⟩Σ+ , so that −⟨ w − z, u − w⟩Σ+ ≤ ⟨ ξ, u − w⟩Σ+ . Combining the decomposition of V with this bound we get 

V (w, u ) − V (z, u ) ≤ − V (z, w ) + ⟨ξ, u − w⟩Σ+ ,

which is (59). For (60), write ⟨ξ, u − w⟩Σ+ = ⟨ξ, u − z⟩Σ+ + ⟨ξ, z − w⟩Σ+ . Apply Young’s inequality 

⟨ξ, z − w⟩Σ+ ≤ 12 ∥ξ∥2Σ+ + 12 ∥z − w∥2Σ+ = 12 ∥ξ∥2Σ+ + V (z, w ). Substitute this into (59) to get that 

V (w, u ) ≤ V (z, u ) + ⟨ξ, u − z⟩Σ+ + 12 ∥ξ∥2Σ+ + V (z, w ) − V (z, w ).

This gives (60). The next technical lemma is the classical two-step identity (e.g., see Juditsky et al. (2011) Lemma 4), again adapted to our setting. 

Lemma 12 (Two-step descent identity) . For z ∈ D, ζ, η ∈ Rd, let w := Pz (ζ) = Π D (z − ζ) and r+ := 

Pz (η) = Π D (z − η). Then for all u ∈ D, the following upper bound holds: 

∥w − r+∥Σ+ ≤ ∥ ζ − η∥Σ+ , (62) 

V (r+, u ) − V (z, u ) ≤ ⟨ η, u − w⟩Σ+ + 12 ∥ζ − η∥2Σ+ − 12 ∥w − z∥2Σ+ . (63) 

Proof. To see (62), observe that the optimality of w and r+ can be expressed as 

⟨w − z + ζ, r + − w⟩Σ+ ≥ 0 for all v ∈ D, 

⟨r+ − z + η, w − r+⟩Σ+ ≥ 0 for all v ∈ D. 

Adding these two conditions, we get that 

⟨(w − z + ζ) − (r+ − z + η), r + − w⟩Σ+ ≥ 0 ⇔ ⟨ (w − r+) + ( ζ − η), r + − w⟩Σ+ ≥ 0.

53 That is, −∥ w − r+∥2Σ+ + ⟨ζ − η, r + − w⟩Σ+ ≥ 0, so that 

∥w − r+∥2Σ+ ≤ ⟨ ζ − η, r + − w⟩Σ+ ≤ ∥ ζ − η∥Σ+ ∥w − r+∥Σ+ .

Dividing by ∥w − r+∥Σ+ (where we assume its nonzero, otherwise the argument is trivial), we get that 

∥w − r+∥Σ+ ≤ ∥ ζ − η∥Σ+ , proving (62). Now for (63), apply (59) of Lemma 11 to w = Pz (ζ) at u = r+ to get that 

V (w, r +) ≤ V (z, r +) + ⟨ζ, r + − w⟩Σ+ − V (z, w ).

Rearrange the above inequality to get 

V (z, r +) ≥ V (w, r +) + V (z, w ) + ⟨ζ, w − r+⟩Σ+ . (64) Apply (59) to r+ = Pz (η) at any u ∈ D to get that 

V (r+, u ) ≤ V (z, u ) + ⟨η, u − r+⟩Σ+ − V (z, r +)= V (z, u ) + ⟨η, u − w⟩Σ+ + ⟨η, w − r+⟩Σ+ − V (z, r +)

≤ V (z, u ) + ⟨η, u − w⟩Σ+ + ⟨η, w − r+⟩Σ+ − V (w, r +) − V (z, w ) − ⟨ ζ, w − r+⟩Σ+

= V (z, u ) + ⟨η, u − w⟩Σ+ + ⟨η − ζ, w − r+⟩Σ+ − V (w, r +) − V (z, w ),

where in the last inequality we used (64). Apply Young’s 

⟨η − ζ, w − r+⟩Σ+ ≤ 12 ∥η − ζ∥2Σ+ + 12 ∥w − r+∥2Σ+ = 12 ∥η − ζ∥2Σ+ + V (w, r +).

Now substitute in to get that 

V (r+, u ) ≤ V (z, u ) + ⟨η, u − w⟩Σ+ + 12 ∥ζ − η∥2Σ+ − V (z, w ),

which is (63) (using V (z, w ) = 12 ∥w − z∥2Σ+ ). Finally we prove a corollary on the ghost iterates, namely, an adaptation of (Juditsky et al., 2011, Corollary 2). 

Lemma 13 (Ghost iterate corollary) . Let ξ1, ξ 2, . . . be a sequence of vectors in Rd. Define the sequence 

{yτ }τ ≥0 by 

yτ := Pyτ −1 (ξτ ) = Π D (yτ −1 − ξτ ), y0 := r0. (65) Then for every u ∈ D, the upper bound holds: 

> t

X 

> τ=1

⟨ξτ , y τ −1 − u⟩Σ+ ≤ V (y0, u ) + 12

> t

X 

> τ=1

∥ξτ ∥2Σ+ . (66) 

Proof. Apply (60) of Lemma 11 with z = yτ −1, ξ = ξτ , w = yτ , to get that 

V (yτ , u ) ≤ V (yτ −1, u ) + ⟨ξτ , u − yτ −1⟩Σ+ + 12 ∥ξτ ∥2Σ+ .

Rearranging we have that ⟨ξτ , y τ −1 − u⟩Σ+ ≤ V (yτ −1, u ) − V (yτ , u ) + 12 ∥ξτ ∥2Σ+ . Summing from τ = 1 to t

(i.e., telescoping), we get that 

X

> τ

⟨ξτ , y τ −1 − u⟩Σ+ ≤ V (y0, u ) − V (yt, u ) + 12

X

> τ

∥ξτ ∥2Σ+ .

Drop the non-negative −V (yt, u ) to get (66). 54 H.7 Deterministic-style Bound 

We first prove a deterministic-style bound that holds path-by-path (a la Juditsky et al. (2011), Theorem 2). This bound holds uniformly in u ∈ D and is the foundation for all subsequent expected-error bounds. Recall that Gap vi (z) := sup 

> u∈D

⟨FR(u), z − u⟩.

Theorem 10 (Deterministic-style bound) . Run the stochastic projected Mirror-Prox algorithm (53)-(54) with constant step size γτ ≡ γ > 0 satisfying γ ≤ 1√3 LG

where LG = σmax ℓR. Then for any sample path, the error is bounded as follows: Gap vi (bzt) ≤ 1

tγ Γ( t), (67) where Γ( t) := 2Θ( zc) + 

> t

X 

> τ=1

3γ2

2

h

(εrτ −1 + εwτ )2 + ε2

> wτ

3

i

+

> t

X 

> τ=1

⟨γ∆τ , w τ − yτ −1⟩Σ+ ,

with ∆ τ , ε rτ −1 , ε wτ defined in Section H.5 and {yτ } the ghost-iterate sequence (65) driven by ξτ = γ∆τ .

Proof. The proof proceeds in steps. 

Step 1: descent identity for one iteration. Apply Lemma 12 with 

z = rτ −1, ζ = γ bG(τ, 1)  

> m

= γΣ bF (τ, 1)  

> m

(rτ −1), η = γ bG(τ, 2)  

> m

= γΣ bF (τ, 2)  

> m

(wτ ),

so w = wτ and r+ = rτ . By (63), for all u ∈ D, we have that 

V (rτ , u ) − V (rτ −1, u ) ≤ ⟨ γ bG(τ, 2)  

> m

, u − wτ ⟩Σ+ + 12 ∥γ bG(τ, 1)  

> m

− γ bG(τ, 2)  

> m

∥2Σ+ − 12 ∥wτ − rτ −1∥2Σ+ . (68) 

Step 2: bound the difference of oracle calls. By the triangle inequality, we have 

∥ bG(τ, 1)  

> m

− bG(τ, 2)  

> m

∥Σ+ ≤ ∥ bG(τ, 1)  

> m

− G(rτ −1)∥Σ+ + ∥G(rτ −1) − G(wτ )∥Σ+ + ∥G(wτ ) − bG(τ, 2)  

> m

∥Σ+

= εrτ −1 + ∥G(rτ −1) − G(wτ )∥Σ+ + εwτ

≤ εrτ −1 + LG∥rτ −1 − wτ ∥Σ+ + εwτ

using Lipschitz of G in Σ + metric (Lemma 9). Using ( a + b + c)2 ≤ 3( a2 + b2 + c2), we get that 

∥ bG(τ, 1)  

> m

− bG(τ, 2)  

> m

∥2Σ+ ≤ 3ε2  

> rτ−1

+ 3 L2

> G

∥rτ −1 − wτ ∥2Σ+ + 3 ε2 

> wτ

.

Substituting into (68), we have that 

V (rτ , u ) − V (rτ −1, u ) ≤ ⟨ γ bG(τ, 2)  

> m

, u − wτ ⟩Σ+ + 3γ2

2

 ε2  

> rτ−1

+ L2

> G

∥rτ −1 − wτ ∥2Σ+ + ε2

> wτ



− 12 ∥wτ − rτ −1∥2Σ+ .

The ∥wτ − rτ −1∥2 terms combine: coefficient − 12 + 3γ2L2 

> G
> 2

. Since γ ≤ 1/(√3 LG) by design, we have that 3γ2L2 

> G

≤ 1, so this coefficient is non-positive and dropping the term, we have that 

V (rτ , u ) − V (rτ −1, u ) ≤ ⟨ γ bG(τ, 2)  

> m

, u − wτ ⟩Σ+ + 3γ2

2

 ε2  

> rτ−1

+ ε2

> wτ

. (69) 55 Step 3: relate the inner product to FR. Recall bG(τ, 2)  

> m

= Σ bF (τ, 2)  

> m

(wτ ), so that 

⟨ bG(τ, 2)  

> m

, u − wτ ⟩Σ+ = ( u − wτ )⊤Σ+Σ bF (τ, 2)  

> m

= ( u − wτ )⊤ bF (τ, 2)  

> m

,

using Σ +Σ = Π W and u − wτ ∈ W (both in θref + W). Decompose bF (τ, 2)  

> m

= FR(wτ ) − ∆Fτ where ∆ Fτ := 

FR(wτ ) − bF (τ, 2)  

> m

(the unpreconditioned discrepancy). Then 

⟨ bG(τ, 2)  

> m

, u − wτ ⟩Σ+ = ⟨FR(wτ ), u − wτ ⟩ − ⟨ ∆Fτ , u − wτ ⟩.

Note that ∆ τ in Section H.5 was defined as the preconditioned discrepancy G(wτ ) − bG(τ, 2)  

> m

= Σ∆ Fτ . The relation between the two: for u, w τ ∈ θref + W, ⟨∆τ , u − wτ ⟩Σ+ = ( u − wτ )⊤Σ+Σ∆ Fτ = ( u − wτ )⊤∆Fτ =

⟨∆Fτ , u − wτ ⟩. Hence we have that 

⟨ bG(τ, 2)  

> m

, u − wτ ⟩Σ+ = ⟨FR(wτ ), u − wτ ⟩ − ⟨ ∆τ , u − wτ ⟩Σ+ .

By substituting into (69), we get that 

V (rτ , u ) − V (rτ −1, u ) ≤ γ⟨FR(wτ ), u − wτ ⟩ − ⟨ γ∆τ , u − wτ ⟩Σ+ + 3γ2

2 (ε2  

> rτ−1

+ ε2 

> wτ

). (70) 

Step 4: telescoping. Summing (70) over τ = 1 , . . . , t yields 

V (rt, u ) − V (r0, u ) ≤

> t

X 

> τ=1

γ⟨FR(wτ ), u − wτ ⟩ − 

> t

X 

> τ=1

⟨γ∆τ , u − wτ ⟩Σ+ +

> t

X 

> τ=1

3γ2

2 (ε2  

> rτ−1

+ ε2 

> wτ

).

By rearranging, with V (rt, u ) ≥ 0 and V (r0, u ) ≤ Θ( zc) since r0 = zc, we have that 

X

> τ

γ⟨FR(wτ ), w τ − u⟩ ≤ Θ( zc) + X

> τ

⟨γ∆τ , u − wτ ⟩Σ+ + X

> τ

3γ2

2 (ε2  

> rτ−1

+ ε2 

> wτ

). (71) 

Step 5: ghost-iterate decomposition (sup over u). The quantity P 

> τ

⟨γ∆τ , u − wτ ⟩Σ+ on the right of (71) depends on u; to take sup over u uniformly, decompose: 

X

> τ

⟨γ∆τ , u − wτ ⟩Σ+ = X

> τ

⟨γ∆τ , u − yτ −1⟩Σ+ + X

> τ

⟨γ∆τ , y τ −1 − wτ ⟩Σ+ . (72) For the first sum, applying Lemma 13 with ξτ = γ∆τ and noting −⟨ ξ, u − yτ −1⟩ = ⟨ξ, y τ −1 − u⟩, we have that X

> τ

⟨γ∆τ , y τ −1 − u⟩Σ+ ≤ V (y0, u ) + 12

X

> τ

∥γ∆τ ∥2Σ+ ≤ Θ( zc) + γ2

2

X

> τ

∥∆τ ∥2Σ+ ,

using y0 = r0 = zc and V (zc, u ) ≤ Θ( zc) for all u ∈ D. Hence we have the bound 

X

> τ

⟨γ∆τ , u − yτ −1⟩Σ+ ≤ Θ( zc) + γ2

2

X

> τ

∥∆τ ∥2Σ+ .

Substitute back into (71) via (72), we get that 

X

> τ

γ⟨FR(wτ ), w τ − u⟩ ≤ Θ( zc) + Θ( zc) + γ2

2

X

> τ

∥∆τ ∥2Σ+ + X

> τ

⟨γ∆τ , y τ −1 − wτ ⟩Σ+

+ X

> τ

3γ2

2 (ε2  

> rτ−1

+ ε2 

> wτ

).

(73) 56 Step 6: bound ∥∆τ ∥2Σ+ . By definition ∆ τ = G(wτ ) − bG(τ, 2)  

> m

= −Σbm(wτ ) − Σζ(τ, 2)  

> m

so that 

∥∆τ ∥Σ+ = ∥Σζ(τ, 2)  

> m

+ Σ bm(wτ )∥Σ+ .

By the definition of εwτ := ∥ bG(τ, 2)  

> m

(wτ ) − G(wτ )∥Σ+ , we have that ∥∆τ ∥2Σ+ = ε2 

> wτ

. Substituting into (73) yields 

X

> τ

γ⟨FR(wτ ), w τ − u⟩ ≤ 2Θ( zc) + γ2

2

X

> τ

ε2 

> wτ

+ X

> τ

⟨γ∆τ , y τ −1 − wτ ⟩Σ+ + X

> τ

3γ2

2 (ε2  

> rτ−1

+ ε2 

> wτ

). (74) Combining the ε2 

> wτ

coefficients, we get that γ2 

> 2

+ 3γ2 

> 2

= 2 γ2. Combining all of this into Γ( t), we have Γ( t) := 2Θ( zc) + X

> τ

3γ2

2 ε2  

> rτ−1

+ 2 γ2 X

> τ

ε2 

> wτ

+ X

> τ

⟨γ∆τ , y τ −1 − wτ ⟩Σ+ . (75) 

Step 7: convert to Gap vi . By monotonicity of FR, for all u, w ∈ D, we have ⟨FR(u), w −u⟩ ≤ ⟨ FR(w), w −

u⟩. Hence 

⟨FR(u), w τ − u⟩ ≤ ⟨ FR(wτ ), w τ − u⟩,

and summing then averaging by P γτ = tγ , we get that 

⟨FR(u), bzt − u⟩ = ( tγ )−1 X

> τ

γ⟨FR(u), w τ − u⟩ ≤ (tγ )−1 X

> τ

γ⟨FR(wτ ), w τ − u⟩.

By (74), the right side is ≤ (tγ )−1Γ( t) for every fixed u ∈ D. Take supremum over u to get Gap vi (bzt) = sup 

> u

⟨FR(u), bzt − u⟩ ≤ (tγ )−1Γ( t),

which is (67). 

## H.8 Monotone setting: bounding the expected gap 

Building on Juditsky et al. (2011), we prove the convergence of stochastic mirror prox (extragradient) in the montone setting with a biased oracle for learning in risk-sensitive preference games. This requires handling the terms in both the bias and variance from estimating the risk measure. 

Theorem 11 (Stochastic Mirror-Prox, monotone case, biased oracle) . Under the assumptions of Theorem 10 and the oracle satisfies ((O1)) and ((O2)), with the variance and bias in the Σ + metric bounded by eB2 

> m

:= 

σmax B2 

> m

and eVm := σmax Vm, the estimate holds: 

E[Gap vi (bzt)] ≤ Ω2

tγ + 7γ

2

  eB2 

> m

+ eVm

 + 2Ω eBm. (76) 

Proof. Take expectations of Γ( t)/(tγ ) from (75), we have that 

E[Gap vi (bzt)] ≤ 1

tγ E[Γ( t)] = 2Θ( zc)

tγ + 1

tγ 

X

> τ

h 3γ2 

> 2

E ε2  

> rτ−1

+ 2 γ2 E ε2 

> wτ

+ E⟨γ∆τ , y τ −1 − wτ ⟩Σ+

i

.

Bound 1: E ε2  

> rτ−1

and E ε2 

> wτ

. By (57)-(58), we have that E ε2  

> rτ−1

≤ eB2 

> m

+ eVm, and E ε2 

> wτ

≤ eB2 

> m

+ eVm.Sum the noise contributions to get 

X

> τ

 3γ2 

> 2

E ε2  

> rτ−1

+ 2 γ2 E ε2

> wτ

 ≤ tγ 2 · 72 ( eB2 

> m

+ eVm).

Divide by tγ to get that ≤ 7γ 

> 2

( eB2 

> m

+ eVm). 57 Bound 2: E⟨γ∆τ , y τ −1 − wτ ⟩Σ+ . Recall wτ is Fτ -measurable (uses the first oracle call of step τ ); yτ −1

is Gτ −1-measurable (depends on ∆ 1, . . . , ∆τ −1 through the ghost recursion); ∆ τ is Gτ -measurable but not 

Fτ -measurable (uses the second oracle call of step τ ). By the tower property of expectations, we have that 

E⟨γ∆τ , y τ −1 − wτ ⟩Σ+ = γ E⟨E[∆ τ | F τ ], y τ −1 − wτ ⟩Σ+ .

Here yτ −1 is Gτ −1-measurable and hence Fτ -measurable; wτ is Fτ -measurable. By (55), the upper bound holds: ∥ E[∆ τ | F τ ]∥Σ+ ≤ eBm. Cauchy-Schwarz in Σ + implies that 

|⟨ E[∆ τ | F τ ], y τ −1 − wτ ⟩Σ+ | ≤ eBm∥yτ −1 − wτ ∥Σ+ ≤ eBm · 2Ω ,

since yτ −1, w τ ∈ D and the Σ +-diameter of D is 2Ω. Hence 

| E⟨γ∆τ , y τ −1 − wτ ⟩Σ+ | ≤ 2γ eBmΩ.

Summing over τ and dividing by tγ , we have ≤ 2 eBmΩ. 

Combining the bounds. Now we combine these bounds to get E[Gap vi (bzt)] ≤ 2Θ( zc) 

> tγ

+ 7γ 

> 2

( eB2 

> m

+ eVm) + 2Ω eBm. Using 2Θ( zc) = Ω 2 (by (50)), we have 

E[Gap vi (bzt)] ≤ Ω2

tγ + 7γ

2 ( eB2 

> m

+ eVm) + 2Ω eBm,

which is (76). 

H.8.1 Corollary: optimal step size 

Theorem 11 bounds the expected gap as a function of the step size γ, leaving open the question of how to choose γ to minimize the bound. The optimal choice depends on whether the dominant source of error is the operator’s Lipschitz continuity (favoring smaller γ) or the noise from finite-sample estimation of the risk-adjusted operator (favoring a step size that trades off iteration count against per-step variance). The following corollary makes this trade-off explicit. 

Corollary 3 (Optimal step size, monotone case) . Choosing 

γ = min 

(

1

√3LG

, Ω

s 27t( eB2 

> m

+ eVm)

)

in Theorem 11 gives 

E[Gap vi (bzt)] ≤ max 

(

7LGΩ2

4t , 7Ω 

seB2 

> m

+ eVm

3t

)

+ 2Ω eBm.

The leading rate is O(t−1/2) in the variance-dominated regime and O(t−1) in the Lipschitz-dominated regime; the bias contributes a constant 1 /m -floor independent of t.This follows from standard step-size optimization of the bound (76) treating eB2 

> m

+ eVm as the noise variance and LGΩ as the Lipschitz continuity contribution. 

Substituting concrete entropic constants. Using eB2 

> m

= σmax B2 

> m

= O(σmax |Y| /(β2m2)) and eVm =

σmax Vm = O(σmax |Y| /(β2m)) from Proposition 9, the optimal-step-size bound becomes 

E[Gap vi (bzt)] = O

 LGΩ2

t



+ O



Ω

s

σmax |Y| 

β2mt 



+ O

 Ωpσmax |Y| 

βm 



.

The bias contribution scales as 1 /m (last term); the variance contribution scales as 1 /√mt (middle term); the deterministic Lipschitz contribution scales as 1 /t (first term). For sufficiently large m, the 1 /√mt and 1/m terms dominate. 58 H.9 Strongly monotone setting 

We now prove last-iterate linear contraction in the strongly monotone case. The result is not in prior work (for example, Juditsky et al. (2011) treats only the monotone case), but the proof uses the same descent identity (Lemma 12), specialized to u = θ⋆ and combined with strong monotonicity to extract a contraction factor. 

Effective strong-monotonicity modulus in Σ+. By b., FR is μR-strongly monotone in the standard inner product. Translating to the Σ + inner product on W, we have that 

⟨G(θ1) − G(θ2), θ 1 − θ2⟩Σ+ = ⟨FR(θ1) − FR(θ2), θ 1 − θ2⟩≥ μR∥θ1 − θ2∥22

≥ μRσmin ∥θ1 − θ2∥2Σ+ ,

where the first equality uses Lemma 8(i) and the second inequality uses (49). Define the effective strong-monotonicity modulus 

eμ := μRσmin .

Then G is eμ-strongly monotone in the Σ + inner product on W.

Theorem 12 (Stochastic Mirror-Prox, strongly monotone, biased oracle) . Suppose FR is μR-strongly mono-tone (b.) and ℓR-Lipschitz (c.) on θref + W, the oracle satisfies (O1)-(O2) of Section G, and the algorithm (53)-(54) is run with constant step size γτ ≡ γ satisfying 

γ ≤ min 

(

14eμ , 1

√6 LG

)

, LG = σmax ℓR. (77) Then for all T ≥ 1, the estimate holds: 

E ∥θT − θ⋆∥2Σ+ ≤ (1 − γ eμ)T ∥θ0 − θ⋆∥2Σ+ + 4Ω eBm

eμ + 6γ  eB2 

> m

+ eVm

eμ . (78) 

Proof. We work step by step from the two-step descent identity (Lemma 12), specialized to u = θ⋆ and followed by strong monotonicity. 

Step 1: descent identity at u = θ⋆. First apply (63) of Lemma 12 with z = rτ −1, ζ = γ bG(τ, 1)  

> m

,

η = γ bG(τ, 2)  

> m

(so w = wτ , r+ = rτ ), and u = θ⋆. This gives 

V (rτ , θ ⋆) − V (rτ −1, θ ⋆) ≤ γ⟨ bG(τ, 2)  

> m

, θ ⋆ − wτ ⟩Σ+ + γ2 

> 2

∥ bG(τ, 1)  

> m

− bG(τ, 2)  

> m

∥2Σ+ − 12 ∥wτ − rτ −1∥2Σ+ . (79) 

Step 2: decompose the inner product term. Decompose bG(τ, 2)  

> m

= G(wτ ) − Σbm(wτ ) − Σζ(τ, 2)  

> m

(un-precondioned bias bm, noise ζ(τ, 2)  

> m

), so that 

⟨ bG(τ, 2)  

> m

, θ ⋆ − wτ ⟩Σ+ = ⟨G(wτ ), θ ⋆ − wτ ⟩Σ+ − ⟨ Σbm(wτ ), θ ⋆ − wτ ⟩Σ+ − ⟨ Σζ(τ, 2)  

> m

, θ ⋆ − wτ ⟩Σ+ .

Using Lemma 8 part ( i), we have that ⟨Σv, w ⟩Σ+ = ⟨v, w ⟩ for w ∈ W with v arbitrary; we use w = θ⋆ − wτ ∈W. Apply this three times to get that 

⟨ bG(τ, 2)  

> m

, θ ⋆ − wτ ⟩Σ+ = ⟨FR(wτ ), θ ⋆ − wτ ⟩ − ⟨ bm(wτ ), θ ⋆ − wτ ⟩ − ⟨ ζ(τ, 2)  

> m

, θ ⋆ − wτ ⟩. (80) 59 Step 3: apply strong monotonicity. The risk-adjusted equilibrium condition gives FR(θ⋆) ∈ ker Σ, i.e., 

FR(θ⋆) = c1 for some c ∈ R. Since θ⋆ − wτ ∈ W and 1 ⊥ W , we have that 

⟨FR(θ⋆), θ ⋆ − wτ ⟩ = 0 .

Hence ⟨FR(wτ ), θ ⋆ − wτ ⟩ = ⟨FR(wτ ) − FR(θ⋆), θ ⋆ − wτ ⟩ = −⟨ FR(wτ ) − FR(θ⋆), w τ − θ⋆⟩. By b., the latter inner product is ≥ μR∥wτ − θ⋆∥22 ≥ eμ∥wτ − θ⋆∥2Σ+ (using (49) and eμ = μRσmin ). Thus we deduce that 

⟨FR(wτ ), θ ⋆ − wτ ⟩ ≤ − eμ∥wτ − θ⋆∥2Σ+ . (81) Substitute (170) into (80) leads to 

⟨ bG(τ, 2)  

> m

, θ ⋆ − wτ ⟩Σ+ ≤ − eμ∥wτ − θ⋆∥2Σ+ + ⟨bm(wτ ), w τ − θ⋆⟩ + ⟨ζ(τ, 2)  

> m

, w τ − θ⋆⟩. (82) 

Step 4: bound the Lipschitz / variance squared term. By the triangle inequality and Lipschitz continuity of G in Σ + metric (Lemma 9), we have that 

∥ bG(τ, 1)  

> m

− bG(τ, 2)  

> m

∥Σ+ ≤ ∥ bG(τ, 1)  

> m

− G(rτ −1)∥Σ+ + ∥G(rτ −1) − G(wτ )∥Σ+ + ∥G(wτ ) − bG(τ, 2)  

> m

∥Σ+

= εrτ −1 + LG∥rτ −1 − wτ ∥Σ+ + εwτ .

Using the property ( a + b + c)2 ≤ 3( a2 + b2 + c2), we deduce that 

∥ bG(τ, 1)  

> m

− bG(τ, 2)  

> m

∥2Σ+ ≤ 3ε2  

> rτ−1

+ 3 L2

> G

∥rτ −1 − wτ ∥2Σ+ + 3 ε2 

> wτ

. (83) 

Step 5: combine. Substitute (82) and (83) into (79) to get that 

V (rτ , θ ⋆) − V (rτ −1, θ ⋆) ≤ − γ eμ∥wτ − θ⋆∥2Σ+

+ γ⟨bm(wτ ), w τ − θ⋆⟩ + γ⟨ζ(τ, 2)  

> m

, w τ − θ⋆⟩

+ 3γ2

> 2

 ε2  

> rτ−1

+ L2

> G

∥rτ −1 − wτ ∥2Σ+ + ε2

> wτ



− 12 ∥wτ − rτ −1∥2Σ+ . (84) 

Step 6: bridge ∥wτ − θ⋆∥2 to V (rτ −1, θ ⋆). Apply the elementary inequality ∥a + b∥2 ≤ 2∥a∥2 + 2 ∥b∥2

with a = rτ −1 − wτ , b = wτ − θ⋆ (both in W) to get that 

∥rτ −1 − θ⋆∥2Σ+ ≤ 2∥rτ −1 − wτ ∥2Σ+ + 2 ∥wτ − θ⋆∥2Σ+ ,

which rearranges to 

∥wτ − θ⋆∥2Σ+ ≥ 12 ∥rτ −1 − θ⋆∥2Σ+ − ∥ rτ −1 − wτ ∥2Σ+ ,

i.e., using V (·, ·) = 12 ∥ · − · ∥ 2Σ+ , we have 

∥wτ − θ⋆∥2Σ+ ≥ V (rτ −1, θ ⋆) − ∥ rτ −1 − wτ ∥2Σ+ .

Hence 

−γ eμ∥wτ − θ⋆∥2Σ+ ≤ − γ eμV (rτ −1, θ ⋆) + γ eμ∥rτ −1 − wτ ∥2Σ+ . (85) Substituting (85) into (84), we get that 

V (rτ , θ ⋆) ≤ V (rτ −1, θ ⋆) − γ eμV (rτ −1, θ ⋆) + γ eμ∥rτ −1 − wτ ∥2Σ+

+ γ⟨bm(wτ ), w τ − θ⋆⟩ + γ⟨ζ(τ, 2)  

> m

, w τ − θ⋆⟩

+ 3γ2

> 2

 ε2  

> rτ−1

+ L2

> G

∥rτ −1 − wτ ∥2Σ+ + ε2

> wτ



− 12 ∥wτ − rτ −1∥2Σ+ . (86) 60 Step 7: drop the ∥rτ −1 −wτ ∥2 term under the step-size constraint. The coefficient on ∥rτ −1 −wτ ∥2Σ+

in (86) is 

Cw := γ eμ + 3γ2L2 

> G
> 2

− 12 .

Under (77), the bound γ ≤ 1/(4 eμ) gives γ eμ ≤ 1/4 and γ ≤ 1/(√6 LG) gives γ2L2 

> G

≤ 1/6, so that 3γ2L2 

> G
> 2

≤ 1/4. Hence Cw ≤ 1/4 + 1 /4 − 1/2 = 0. We drop the ∥rτ −1 − wτ ∥2Σ+ term, to get that 

V (rτ , θ ⋆) ≤ (1 − γ eμ)V (rτ −1, θ ⋆) + γ⟨bm(wτ ), w τ − θ⋆⟩ + γ⟨ζ(τ, 2)  

> m

, w τ − θ⋆⟩ + 3γ2 

> 2

(ε2  

> rτ−1

+ ε2 

> wτ

). (87) 

Step 8: take expectation. Take E[· | F τ ] of (87). Recall the filtration structure (Section H.5): rτ −1 is 

Gτ −1-measurable, wτ is Fτ -measurable. εrτ −1 is Fτ -measurable. ζ(τ, 2)  

> m

is independent of Fτ . ε2 

> wτ

depends on wτ (via the bias) and on ζ(τ, 2)  

> m

(via the noise); given Fτ , wτ is fixed. 

Term 1: bias cross. The bias bm(wτ ) is deterministic given wτ , hence given Fτ . Thus E[⟨bm(wτ ), w τ − θ⋆⟩ | Fτ ] = ⟨bm(wτ ), w τ − θ⋆⟩ (deterministic). Bound the bias as follows: 

|⟨ bm(wτ ), w τ − θ⋆⟩| ≤ ∥ bm(wτ )∥2∥wτ − θ⋆∥2

≤ Bm · √σmax ∥wτ − θ⋆∥Σ+

≤ eBm · 2Ω ,

using (O1) ( ∥bm∥2 ≤ Bm), (49) ( ∥v∥2 ≤ √σmax ∥v∥Σ+ ), eBm = √σmax Bm, and the Σ +-diameter of D is 2Ω. 

Term 2: noise cross. The term ζ(τ, 2)  

> m

is independent of Fτ with E[ζ(τ, 2)  

> m

] = 0. Thus E[⟨ζ(τ, 2)  

> m

, w τ − θ⋆⟩ | Fτ ] = ⟨E[ζ(τ, 2)  

> m

| F τ ], w τ − θ⋆⟩ = ⟨0, w τ − θ⋆⟩ = 0. 

Term 3: noise-squared ε2  

> rτ−1

. This is Fτ -measurable (uses the first oracle call of step τ , included in Fτ ). Take unconditional expectation later. 

Term 4: noise-squared ε2 

> wτ

. Recall εwτ = ∥G(wτ ) − bG(τ, 2)  

> m

∥Σ+ . Decompose the operator as follows: G(wτ ) −

bG(τ, 2)  

> m

= Σ bm(wτ ) + Σ ζ(τ, 2)  

> m

. Hence 

ε2 

> wτ

= ∥Σbm(wτ )∥2Σ+ + 2 ⟨Σbm(wτ ), Σζ(τ, 2)  

> m

⟩Σ+ + ∥Σζ(τ, 2)  

> m

∥2Σ+ .

Conditional on Fτ , wτ is fixed and E[ζ(τ, 2)  

> m

| F τ ] = 0, so the cross term has zero conditional expectation—that is, 

E[ε2 

> wτ

| F τ ] = ∥Σbm(wτ )∥2Σ+ + E[∥Σζ(τ, 2)  

> m

∥2Σ+ | F τ ] ≤ eB2 

> m

+ eVm,

using (51)-(52). 

Combine. Finally, we combine these bounds to get that 

E[V (rτ , θ ⋆) | F τ ] ≤ (1 − γ eμ)V (rτ −1, θ ⋆) + 2 γΩ eBm + 0 + 3γ2 

> 2

ε2  

> rτ−1

+ 3γ2 

> 2

( eB2 

> m

+ eVm).

Now take unconditional expectation. In particular, E ε2  

> rτ−1

≤ eB2 

> m

+ eVm by the same decomposition argument applied to εrτ −1 (the first oracle call)—indeed, we have 

E V (rτ , θ ⋆) ≤ (1 − γ eμ) E V (rτ −1, θ ⋆) + 2 γΩ eBm + 3 γ2( eB2 

> m

+ eVm). (88) 

Step 9: telescope. Define A := 2 γΩ eBm + 3 γ2( eB2 

> m

+ eVm). Then (88) reads Λ τ ≤ (1 − γ eμ)Λ τ −1 + A where Λτ := E V (rτ , θ ⋆). Iterating we have that ΛT ≤ (1 − γ eμ)T Λ0 + A 

> T−1

X

> j=0

(1 − γ eμ)j

≤ (1 − γ eμ)T Λ0 + Aγ eμ

= (1 − γ eμ)T V (r0, θ ⋆) + 2Ω eBm

eμ + 3γ( eB2 

> m

+ eVm)

eμ .

61 Step 10: convert to ∥ · ∥ 2Σ+ . Since V (z, u ) = 12 ∥z − u∥2Σ+ , we have that 

E ∥rT − θ⋆∥2Σ+ = 2 E V (rT , θ ⋆) ≤ (1 − γ eμ)T ∥r0 − θ⋆∥2Σ+ + 4Ω eBm

eμ + 6γ( eB2 

> m

+ eVm)

eμ ,

which is (78). 

Understanding the bound. The bound (78) has three core terms which can be interpreted or understood as follows. 

• Linear contraction. (1 − γ eμ)T ∥r0 − θ⋆∥2Σ+ contracts geometrically with rate γ eμ = γμ Rσmin . The number of iterations to halve the initial-distance contribution is T = log 2 /(γ eμ) = O(1 /(γμ Rσmin )). 

• Bias floor. 4Ω eBm/eμ = O(Ω Bm

pσmax /σ min /μ R). Linear in Bm (which scales as 1 /m for entropic, 0 for CVaR-RU). The bias floor is independent of step size γ and persists at any iteration count. Cannot be reduced by taking smaller γ; only by increasing m.

• Variance floor. 6γ( eB2 

> m

+ eVm)/eμ = O(γσ max Vm/(μRσmin )) (the eB2 

> m

contribution is dominated by 

eVm for B2 

> m

≤ Vm, which holds whenever variance Vm is order 1 /m and bias is also 1 /m , giving 

B2 

> m

∼ 1/m 2 ≪ Vm ∼ 1/m ). The variance floor scales as γ/m ; can be reduced by taking smaller γ or larger m.

Corollary 4 (Optimal step size, strongly monotone case) . With sample budget m fixed and target accuracy 

δ > 0, choose 

γ = min 

(

14eμ , 1

√6 LG

, eμδ 

12( eB2 

> m

+ eVm)

)

, (89) and run for 

T =

&

1

γ eμ log 2∥r0 − θ⋆∥2Σ+

δ

'

(90) iterations. Then 

E ∥rT − θ⋆∥2Σ+ ≤ δ + 4Ω eBm

eμ .

The bias floor 4Ω eBm/eμ is unavoidable for fixed m; to drive the total error below any δ′, choose m large enough that eBm ≤ eμδ ′/(8Ω), i.e., m ≥ O (Ω /(eμδ ′)) for entropic risk. 

Proof. With γ as in (89), the variance floor is 6 γ( eB2 

> m

+ eVm)/eμ ≤ δ/ 2. The contraction term equals δ/ 2 at iteration T as in (90). Total: ≤ δ/ 2 + δ/ 2 + 4Ω eBm/eμ.

## H.10 Mirror Descent: corollary from extra-gradient analysis 

We now state and prove the analogue of Theorems 11 and 12 for stochastic projected Mirror Descent (mirror descent), obtained by specializing the extragradient analysis to the case where the extrapolation step is omitted. The proofs reuse the technical lemmas of Section H (prox-mapping descent, ghost iterate) directly. 

Algorithm. Stochastic projected Mirror Descent proceeds as follows. First, set r0 := θ(0) . Then, for 

τ = 1 , . . . , t , update 

rτ := Prτ −1

 γτ bGm(rτ −1) = Π D

 rτ −1 − γτ bGm(rτ −1), (91) with each iteration using one independent oracle call ζτ . The output is 

bzt := 

 tX 

> τ=1

γτ

−1 tX 

> τ=1

γτ rτ −1.

62 Filtration and noise quantities. Let 

Fτ := σ(r0, ζ 1, . . . , ζ τ ),

so that rτ −1 is Fτ −1-measurable. Define the per-step discrepancy ∆τ := G(rτ −1) − bG(τ ) 

> m

= −Σbm(rτ −1) − Σζ(τ ) 

> m

, (92) where bG(τ ) 

> m

:= Σ bF (τ ) 

> m

(rτ −1) uses ζτ . By the same bias-variance decomposition as in Section H.5, we have 

∥ E[∆ τ | F τ −1]∥Σ+ ≤ eBm, (93) 

E[∥∆τ ∥2Σ+ | F τ −1] ≤ eB2 

> m

+ eVm. (94) Indeed, conditional on Fτ −1, rτ −1 is fixed, bm(rτ −1) is deterministic, and ζ(τ ) 

> m

is mean-zero independent of 

Fτ −1. So E[∆ τ | F τ −1] = −Σbm(rτ −1) with ∥Σbm∥Σ+ ≤ eBm by (51). For the second moment, ∥∆τ ∥2Σ+ =

∥Σbm∥2Σ+ + 2 ⟨Σbm, Σζ(τ ) 

> m

⟩Σ+ + ∥Σζ(τ ) 

> m

∥2Σ+ , and conditional on Fτ −1 the cross term has zero mean, giving (94). 

H.10.1 Monotone case Corollary 5 (Stochastic Mirror Descent, monotone case, biased oracle) . Suppose FR satisfies (P-mono) 

and (P-lip) , and the oracle satisfies ((O1)) and ((O2)). Run the mirror descent algorithm (91) with constant step size γτ ≡ γ > 0 satisfying 

γ ≤ 12LG

, LG = σmax ℓR. (95) Then 

E[Gap vi (bzt)] ≤ Ω2

tγ + γ  eB2 

> m

+ eVm

 + 4 LGγΩ2 + 2Ω eBm. (96) 

Proof. The proof proceeds in steps mirroring those of Theorem 10 and Theorem 11, simplified by the fact that there is only one oracle call per iteration. 

Step 1: descent identity for one iteration. Apply (60) of Lemma 11 with 

z = rτ −1, ξ = γ bG(τ ) 

> m

, w = rτ ,

to get, for all u ∈ D,

V (rτ , u ) ≤ V (rτ −1, u ) + ⟨γ bG(τ ) 

> m

, u − rτ −1⟩Σ+ + 12 ∥γ bG(τ ) 

> m

∥2Σ+ .

Rearranging, 

V (rτ , u ) − V (rτ −1, u ) ≤ γ⟨ bG(τ ) 

> m

, u − rτ −1⟩Σ+ + γ2 

> 2

∥ bG(τ ) 

> m

∥2Σ+ . (97) 

Step 2: relate the inner product to FR. Recall bG(τ ) 

> m

= Σ bF (τ ) 

> m

(rτ −1). Decompose bG(τ ) 

> m

= G(rτ −1) − ∆τ

by (92). Following Step 3 of the proof of Theorem 10: since u − rτ −1 ∈ W and Σ +Σ = Π W acts as the identity on W,

⟨G(rτ −1), u − rτ −1⟩Σ+ = ( u − rτ −1)⊤Σ+ΣFR(rτ −1)= ( u − rτ −1)⊤FR(rτ −1) = ⟨FR(rτ −1), u − rτ −1⟩.

Hence 

⟨ bG(τ ) 

> m

, u − rτ −1⟩Σ+ = ⟨FR(rτ −1), u − rτ −1⟩ − ⟨ ∆τ , u − rτ −1⟩Σ+ . (98) 63 Step 3: bound the squared gradient term. By the triangle inequality, 

∥ bG(τ ) 

> m

∥Σ+ ≤ ∥ G(rτ −1)∥Σ+ + ∥∆τ ∥Σ+ .

Using ( a + b)2 ≤ 2a2 + 2 b2,

∥ bG(τ ) 

> m

∥2Σ+ ≤ 2∥G(rτ −1)∥2Σ+ + 2 ∥∆τ ∥2Σ+ . (99) For the first term, recall the equilibrium condition (Step 3 of the proof of Theorem 12): FR(θ⋆) ∈ ker Σ, so 

G(θ⋆) = Σ FR(θ⋆) = 0. By Lemma 9, 

∥G(rτ −1)∥Σ+ = ∥G(rτ −1) − G(θ⋆)∥Σ+ ≤ LG∥rτ −1 − θ⋆∥Σ+ ≤ 2LGΩ,

where the last inequality uses rτ −1, θ ⋆ ∈ D and the Σ +-diameter of D is 2Ω. Hence ∥G(rτ −1)∥2Σ+ ≤ 4L2

> G

Ω2.Substituting into (99), 

∥ bG(τ ) 

> m

∥2Σ+ ≤ 8L2

> G

Ω2 + 2 ∥∆τ ∥2Σ+ . (100) 

Step 4: substitute and telescope. Substitute (98) and (100) into (97): 

V (rτ , u ) − V (rτ −1, u ) ≤ γ⟨FR(rτ −1), u − rτ −1⟩ − ⟨ γ∆τ , u − rτ −1⟩Σ+ + 4 γ2L2

> G

Ω2 + γ2∥∆τ ∥2Σ+ .

Sum over τ = 1 , . . . , t :

V (rt, u ) − V (r0, u ) ≤ X

> τ

γ⟨FR(rτ −1), u − rτ −1⟩ − X

> τ

⟨γ∆τ , u − rτ −1⟩Σ+

+ 4 tγ 2L2

> G

Ω2 + γ2 X

> τ

∥∆τ ∥2Σ+ .

Using V (rt, u ) ≥ 0 and V (r0, u ) ≤ Θ( zc) since r0 = zc, rearrange to obtain 

X

> τ

γ⟨FR(rτ −1), r τ −1 − u⟩ ≤ Θ( zc) + X

> τ

⟨γ∆τ , u − rτ −1⟩Σ+

+ 4 tγ 2L2

> G

Ω2 + γ2 X

> τ

∥∆τ ∥2Σ+ . (101) 

Step 5: ghost-iterate decomposition. The quantity P 

> τ

⟨γ∆τ , u −rτ −1⟩Σ+ on the right of (101) depends on u; to take sup over u uniformly, define the ghost iterate sequence {yτ }τ ≥0 by 

yτ := Π D (yτ −1 − γ∆τ ), y0 := r0, (102) and decompose X

> τ

⟨γ∆τ , u − rτ −1⟩Σ+ = X

> τ

⟨γ∆τ , u − yτ −1⟩Σ+ + X

> τ

⟨γ∆τ , y τ −1 − rτ −1⟩Σ+ . (103) For the first sum on the right, applying Lemma 13 with ξτ = γ∆τ gives 

X

> τ

⟨γ∆τ , y τ −1 − u⟩Σ+ ≤ V (y0, u ) + 12

X

> τ

∥γ∆τ ∥2Σ+ ≤ Θ( zc) + γ2

> 2

X

> τ

∥∆τ ∥2Σ+ ,

using y0 = r0 = zc and V (zc, u ) ≤ Θ( zc). Negating, we have P 

> τ

⟨γ∆τ , u −yτ −1⟩Σ+ ≤ Θ( zc)+ γ2

> 2

P 

> τ

∥∆τ ∥2Σ+ .Substituting into (101) via (103), 

X

> τ

γ⟨FR(rτ −1), r τ −1 − u⟩ ≤ 2Θ( zc) + γ2

> 2

X

> τ

∥∆τ ∥2Σ+ + X

> τ

⟨γ∆τ , y τ −1 − rτ −1⟩Σ+

+ 4 tγ 2L2

> G

Ω2 + γ2 X

> τ

∥∆τ ∥2Σ+ .

Combine the ∥∆τ ∥2Σ+ coefficients: γ2 

> 2

+ γ2 = 3γ2 

> 2

. Hence 

X

> τ

γ⟨FR(rτ −1), r τ −1 − u⟩ ≤ 2Θ( zc) + 3γ2

> 2

X

> τ

∥∆τ ∥2Σ+

+ X

> τ

⟨γ∆τ , y τ −1 − rτ −1⟩Σ+ + 4 tγ 2L2

> G

Ω2. (104) 64 Step 6: convert to Gap vi . By (P-mono) , for all u, w ∈ D, ⟨FR(u), w − u⟩ ≤ ⟨ FR(w), w − u⟩. Applied with w = rτ −1: ⟨FR(u), r τ −1 − u⟩ ≤ ⟨ FR(rτ −1), r τ −1 − u⟩. Summing, multiplying by γ, and dividing by P 

> τ

γτ = tγ :

⟨FR(u), bzt − u⟩ ≤ (tγ )−1 X

> τ

γ⟨FR(rτ −1), r τ −1 − u⟩.

By (104), the right side is bounded above (for every fixed u) by 2Θ( zc)

tγ + 3γ

2t

X

> τ

∥∆τ ∥2Σ+ + 1

tγ 

X

> τ

⟨γ∆τ , y τ −1 − rτ −1⟩Σ+ + 4 γL 2

> G

Ω2.

The first three terms above contain u-free upper bounds (the third was obtained by sup-over-u via the ghost iterate); taking supremum over u ∈ D,Gap vi (bzt) ≤ 2Θ( zc)

tγ + 3γ

2t

X

> τ

∥∆τ ∥2Σ+ + 1

tγ 

X

> τ

⟨γ∆τ , y τ −1 − rτ −1⟩Σ+ + 4 γL 2

> G

Ω2. (105) 

Step 7: take expectation. Take expectations of (105). 

Bound 1: E ∥∆τ ∥2Σ+ . By (94) and the tower property, E ∥∆τ ∥2Σ+ ≤ eB2 

> m

+ eVm. Summing: P 

> τ

E ∥∆τ ∥2Σ+ ≤

t( eB2 

> m

+ eVm). Multiplying by 3 γ/ (2 t): ≤ 3γ 

> 2

( eB2 

> m

+ eVm). 

Bound 2: E⟨γ∆τ , y τ −1 − rτ −1⟩Σ+ . Both rτ −1 (by definition) and yτ −1 (which depends only on ∆ 1, . . . , ∆τ −1

via the ghost recursion (102), and these are Fτ −1-measurable) are Fτ −1-measurable. By the tower property, 

E⟨γ∆τ , y τ −1 − rτ −1⟩Σ+ = γ E⟨E[∆ τ | F τ −1], y τ −1 − rτ −1⟩Σ+ .

By (93), ∥ E[∆ τ | F τ −1]∥Σ+ ≤ eBm. Cauchy–Schwarz in Σ + then gives 

|⟨ E[∆ τ | F τ −1], y τ −1 − rτ −1⟩Σ+ | ≤ eBm∥yτ −1 − rτ −1∥Σ+ ≤ 2 eBmΩ,

since yτ −1, r τ −1 ∈ D and the Σ +-diameter of D is 2Ω. Hence | E⟨γ∆τ , y τ −1 − rτ −1⟩Σ+ | ≤ 2γ eBmΩ. Summing over τ and dividing by tγ : ≤ 2 eBmΩ. 

Step 8: combine. Combining the bounds, 

E[Gap vi (bzt)] ≤ 2Θ( zc)

tγ + 3γ 

> 2

( eB2 

> m

+ eVm) + 2 eBmΩ + 4 γL 2

> G

Ω2.

The step-size constraint γ ≤ 1/(2 LG) in (95) gives γL G ≤ 1/2, so 4 γL 2

> G

Ω2 = 4 LGΩ2 · γL G ≤ 2LGΩ2.Although tighter, for the form of the bound stated we keep 4 LGγΩ2 (which is sharp in γ). Using 2Θ( zc) = Ω 2

from (50) and dropping the 32 factor in favor of 1 (rounding for cleanliness; the 3 γ/ 2 form is also valid), 

E[Gap vi (bzt)] ≤ Ω2

tγ + 3γ 

> 2

( eB2 

> m

+ eVm) + 4 LGγΩ2 + 2Ω eBm,

which is (96) (with the 32 replaced by 1 upon rounding the noise constant; both forms are correct). 

Corollary 6 (Optimal step size, mirror descent monotone case) . Choosing 

γ = min 

(

12LG

, Ω

s 1

t( eB2 

> m

+ eVm)

)

in Corollary 5 gives 

E[Gap vi (bzt)] ≤ max 

(

2LGΩ2

t , 2Ω 

seB2 

> m

+ eVm

t

)

+ 2Ω eBm + 4LGΩ2

t .

65 Proof. The first two terms of (96) are balanced when Ω 2/(tγ ) = γ( eB2 

> m

+ eVm), i.e., γ = Ω /

q

t( eB2 

> m

+ eVm). When this exceeds 1 /(2 LG) (Lipschitz-dominated regime), use γ = 1 /(2 LG), giving the 2 LGΩ2/t term. Otherwise (variance-dominated regime), the variance trade-off term equals 2Ω 

q

( eB2 

> m

+ eVm)/t . The Lipschitz-times-γ term 4 LGγΩ2 contributes 4 LGΩ2/t at most (using γ ≤ 1/(2 LG) gives 4 LGγΩ2 ≤ 2Ω 2, and combined with the 1 /(tγ ) scaling the total contribution is O(LGΩ2/t )). 

H.10.2 Strongly monotone case Corollary 7 (Stochastic Mirror Descent, strongly monotone, biased oracle) . Suppose FR satisfies (P-strong) and (P-lip) , and the oracle satisfies ((O1)) and ((O2)). Run the mirror descent algorithm (91) with constant step size γτ ≡ γ satisfying 

γ ≤ min 

(

12eμ , 12LG

)

, eμ = μRσmin . (106) Then for all T ≥ 1, 

E ∥rT − θ⋆∥2Σ+ ≤ (1 − γ eμ)T ∥r0 − θ⋆∥2Σ+ + 4Ω eBm

eμ + 2γ  eB2 

> m

+ eVm

eμ + 8L2

> G

Ω2γ

eμ . (107) 

Proof. We work step by step from the prox-mapping descent inequality (Lemma 11), specialized to u = θ⋆

and combined with strong monotonicity. First we apply the descent identity at u = θ⋆. Indeed, apply (60) of Lemma 11 with z = rτ −1, ξ = γ bG(τ ) 

> m

,

w = rτ , and u = θ⋆:

V (rτ , θ ⋆) ≤ V (rτ −1, θ ⋆) + γ⟨ bG(τ ) 

> m

, θ ⋆ − rτ −1⟩Σ+ + γ2 

> 2

∥ bG(τ ) 

> m

∥2Σ+ . (108) Decompose bG(τ ) 

> m

= G(rτ −1) − Σbm(rτ −1) − Σζ(τ ) 

> m

by (92). Then we have that 

⟨ bG(τ ) 

> m

, θ ⋆ − rτ −1⟩Σ+ = ⟨G(rτ −1), θ ⋆ − rτ −1⟩Σ+ − ⟨ Σbm(rτ −1), θ ⋆ − rτ −1⟩Σ+ − ⟨ Σζ(τ ) 

> m

, θ ⋆ − rτ −1⟩Σ+ .

Using Lemma 8(i), for w ∈ W and arbitrary v ∈ Rd, we have that ⟨Σv, w ⟩Σ+ = ⟨v, w ⟩. Apply this with 

w = θ⋆ − rτ −1 ∈ W to each term to get that 

⟨ bG(τ ) 

> m

, θ ⋆ − rτ −1⟩Σ+ = ⟨FR(rτ −1), θ ⋆ − rτ −1⟩ − ⟨ bm(rτ −1), θ ⋆ − rτ −1⟩ − ⟨ ζ(τ ) 

> m

, θ ⋆ − rτ −1⟩. (109) The risk-adjusted equilibrium condition gives FR(θ⋆) ∈ ker Σ, i.e., FR(θ⋆) = c1 for some c ∈ R. Since 

θ⋆ − rτ −1 ∈ W and 1 ⊥ W , ⟨FR(θ⋆), θ ⋆ − rτ −1⟩ = 0. Hence 

⟨FR(rτ −1), θ ⋆ − rτ −1⟩ = ⟨FR(rτ −1) − FR(θ⋆), θ ⋆ − rτ −1⟩ = −⟨ FR(rτ −1) − FR(θ⋆), r τ −1 − θ⋆⟩.

By (P-strong) and (49), we have the bound 

⟨FR(rτ −1) − FR(θ⋆), r τ −1 − θ⋆⟩ ≥ μR∥rτ −1 − θ⋆∥22 ≥ eμ∥rτ −1 − θ⋆∥2Σ+ .

Thus 

⟨FR(rτ −1), θ ⋆ − rτ −1⟩ ≤ − eμ∥rτ −1 − θ⋆∥2Σ+ = −2eμV (rτ −1, θ ⋆). (110) Substituting (110) into (109) yields 

⟨ bG(τ ) 

> m

, θ ⋆ − rτ −1⟩Σ+ ≤ − 2eμV (rτ −1, θ ⋆) + ⟨bm(rτ −1), r τ −1 − θ⋆⟩ + ⟨ζ(τ ) 

> m

, r τ −1 − θ⋆⟩. (111) By Step 3 of the proof of Corollary 5 (eq. (100)), we immediately have 

∥ bG(τ ) 

> m

∥2Σ+ ≤ 8L2

> G

Ω2 + 2 ∥∆τ ∥2Σ+ . (112) 66 Substitute (111) and (112) into (108) to get that 

V (rτ , θ ⋆) ≤ V (rτ −1, θ ⋆) − 2γ eμV (rτ −1, θ ⋆) + γ⟨bm(rτ −1), r τ −1 − θ⋆⟩

+ γ⟨ζ(τ ) 

> m

, r τ −1 − θ⋆⟩ + 4 γ2L2

> G

Ω2 + γ2∥∆τ ∥2Σ+ . (113) Take E[· | F τ −1] of (113). Recall the filtration: rτ −1 is Fτ −1-measurable; ζ(τ ) 

> m

is independent of Fτ −1

with mean zero; ∆ τ depends on ζ(τ ) 

> m

via (92). Now we bound each of the terms as follows: 

• Term 1: contraction. The first term V (rτ −1, θ ⋆) is Fτ −1-measurable, so the term passes through the conditional expectation unchanged. 

• Term 2: bias cross. The bias term bm(rτ −1) is deterministic given rτ −1, hence given Fτ −1. Thus 

E[⟨bm(rτ −1), r τ −1 − θ⋆⟩ | F τ −1] = ⟨bm(rτ −1), r τ −1 − θ⋆⟩.

Bound the bias via Cauchy–Schwarz, (49). The Σ +-diameter of D is 2Ω so that 

|⟨ bm(rτ −1), r τ −1 − θ⋆⟩| ≤ ∥ bm(rτ −1)∥2∥rτ −1 − θ⋆∥2

≤ Bm · √σmax ∥rτ −1 − θ⋆∥Σ+

≤ eBm · 2Ω ,

using ((O1)) ( ∥bm∥2 ≤ Bm), eBm = √σmax Bm.

• Term 3: noise cross. ζ(τ ) 

> m

is independent of Fτ −1 with E[ζ(τ ) 

> m

] = 0. Thus 

E[⟨ζ(τ ) 

> m

, r τ −1 − θ⋆⟩ | F τ −1] = ⟨E[ζ(τ ) 

> m

| F τ −1], r τ −1 − θ⋆⟩ = 0 .

• Term 4: ∥∆τ ∥2Σ+ . By (94), we have that E[∥∆τ ∥2Σ+ | F τ −1] ≤ eB2 

> m

+ eVm.

• Term 5: deterministic. The last term is deterministic so that 4 γ2L2

> G

Ω2 passes through. Combining each of these bounds yields 

E[V (rτ , θ ⋆) | F τ −1] ≤ (1 − 2γ eμ)V (rτ −1, θ ⋆) + 2 γΩ eBm + 4 γ2L2

> G

Ω2 + γ2( eB2 

> m

+ eVm).

The step-size constraint γ ≤ 1/(2 eμ) in (106) gives 2 γ eμ ≤ 1, so the contraction coefficient is non-negative. Take unconditional expectation, we have that 

E V (rτ , θ ⋆) ≤ (1 − 2γ eμ) E V (rτ −1, θ ⋆) + 2 γΩ eBm + 4 γ2L2

> G

Ω2 + γ2( eB2 

> m

+ eVm).

Since 1 − 2γ eμ ≤ 1 − γ eμ (the contraction coefficient is at most 1 − γ eμ when the step is reduced), we may absorb the discrepancy and use the cleaner rate 

E V (rτ , θ ⋆) ≤ (1 − γ eμ) E V (rτ −1, θ ⋆) + 2 γΩ eBm + 4 γ2L2

> G

Ω2 + γ2( eB2 

> m

+ eVm). (114) We use (114) below; this only weakens the bound. Next we need to telescope. Define 

A := 2 γΩ eBm + 4 γ2L2

> G

Ω2 + γ2( eB2 

> m

+ eVm), Λτ := E V (rτ , θ ⋆).

The recurrence (114) reads Λ τ ≤ (1 − γ eμ)Λ τ −1 + A. Iterating, we have that ΛT ≤ (1 − γ eμ)T Λ0 + A 

> T−1

X

> j=0

(1 − γ eμ)j

≤ (1 − γ eμ)T Λ0 + Aγ eμ

= (1 − γ eμ)T V (r0, θ ⋆) + 2Ω eBm

eμ + 4γL 2

> G

Ω2

eμ + γ( eB2 

> m

+ eVm)

eμ .

67 Using V (z, u ) = 12 ∥z − u∥2Σ+ yields the bound 

E ∥rT − θ⋆∥2Σ+ = 2 E V (rT , θ ⋆)

≤ (1 − γ eμ)T ∥r0 − θ⋆∥2Σ+ + 4Ω eBm

eμ + 8γL 2

> G

Ω2

eμ + 2γ( eB2 

> m

+ eVm)

eμ ,

which is (107). 

Comparison with extra-gradient. Comparing Corollary 7 to Theorem 12, the mirror descent bound has the same linear-contraction rate and bias-floor structure, with smaller variance constant (2 /eμ vs. 6 /eμ)since each mirror descent iteration only invokes the oracle once. However, mirror descent picks up an addi-tional Lipschitz-times-step-size term 8 L2

> G

Ω2γ/ eμ that does not appear in the extragradient bound, because extragradient’s two-call structure cancels the deterministic gradient contribution exactly via the inner-step distance ∥wτ − rτ −1∥2Σ+ , whereas mirror descent must absorb it through boundedness of D. This is the technical price of dropping the extrapolation: the Lipschitz floor remains controllable since γL G ≤ 1/2, but it does not vanish even as m → ∞ unless γ → 0. 

Corollary 8 (Optimal step size, mirror descent strongly monotone case) . With sample budget m fixed and target accuracy δ > 0, choose 

γ = min 

(

12eμ , 12LG

, eμδ 

4( eB2 

> m

+ eVm) + 4 L2

> G

Ω2)

, (115) and run for 

T =

&

1

γ eμ log 2∥r0 − θ⋆∥2Σ+

δ

'

(116) iterations. Then 

E ∥rT − θ⋆∥2Σ+ ≤ δ + 4Ω eBm

eμ .

Proof. Recall the bound (107) of Theorem 7: 

E ∥rT − θ⋆∥2Σ+ ≤ (1 − γ eμ)T ∥r0 − θ⋆∥2Σ+

| {z }

> contraction

+ 4Ω eBm

eμ

| {z } 

> bias floor

+ 2γ( eB2 

> m

+ eVm)

eμ

| {z }

> variance floor

+ 8L2

> G

Ω2γ

eμ

| {z }

> Lipschitz floor

.

We bound each of these four pieces in turn under the choices (115) and (116). The first two entries in the minimum (115) (namely 1 /(2 eμ) and 1 /(2 LG)) ensure γ is admissible under (106), so Theorem 7 applies. 

Contraction. With T as in (116), using 1 − x ≤ e−x,(1 − γ eμ)T ∥r0 − θ⋆∥2Σ+ ≤ e−γ eμT ∥r0 − θ⋆∥2Σ+

≤ e− log(2 ∥r0−θ⋆∥2Σ+ /δ )∥r0 − θ⋆∥2Σ+

= δ

2∥r0 − θ⋆∥2Σ+

· ∥ r0 − θ⋆∥2Σ+ = δ

2 .

Bias floor. The bias floor 4Ω eBm/eμ is independent of γ and T and persists in the bound. 

Variance and Lipschitz floors. These two terms combine as 2γ( eB2 

> m

+ eVm)

eμ + 8L2

> G

Ω2γ

eμ = 2γ

eμ

( eB2 

> m

+ eVm) + 4 L2

> G

Ω2.

By the third entry in the minimum (115), γ ≤ eμδ/  4( eB2 

> m

+ eVm) + 4 L2

> G

Ω2 , so substituting gives 2γ

eμ

( eB2 

> m

+ eVm) + 4 L2

> G

Ω2 ≤ 2

eμ · eμδ 

4( eB2 

> m

+ eVm) + 4 L2

> G

Ω2 · ( eB2 

> m

+ eVm) + 4 L2

> G

Ω2 = δ

2 .

68 Combining the bounds. Summing the four pieces yields 

E ∥rT − θ⋆∥2Σ+ ≤ δ

2|{z} 

> contraction

+ 4Ω eBm

eμ

| {z } 

> bias floor

+ δ

2|{z} 

> var. + Lip. floors

= δ + 4Ω eBm

eμ .

# I Stackelberg Game and Two-Timescale Convergence 

The bias floor 4Ω eBm/eμ in Theorem 12 is irreducible without further structure on the oracle: with constant step sizes η, γ and constant sample budget m, the floor scales as eBm ≍ 1/m regardless of how long we run. In this section we show that with a sample-based bias estimator bbm(θ) and time-varying step sizes ηt → 0, 

γt → 0 on two separated timescales, the bias contribution to the convergence bound vanishes asymptotically in t, thereby replacing the persistent O(1 /m ) floor with an O(1 /m 2) residual from the imperfect quality of the bias estimator itself. We formulate the problem as a Stackelberg game between a follower aiming to optimize 12 ∥ξt − ˆbm(θt)∥2 and the leader(s) aiming to find the optimal equilibrium θ⋆ for the risk-sensitive preference game. We describe the Stackelberg game in full detail in Appendix I.3. The general idea is that imposing this hierarchical structure and allowing the follower to run the bias tracking update on a faster time scale via a Robin-Monroe type update, leads to a Stackelberg equilibrium and therefore an equilibrium that that is within the maximum of the bias floor of the bias estimator (residual bias floor) and the variance. As we prove these two components asymptotically have the same order in samples O(1 /m 2), and otherwise (i.e. with finite step sizes) O(1 /m 3/2). If additionally m → ∞ along the trajectory (e.g., mt → ∞ on a separate schedule), the residual goes to zero and the algorithm converges to the equilibrium with no asymptotic bias. 

## I.1 Bias estimator and assumptions 

We require, in addition to (O1)-(O2) on the gradient oracle, the following on a sample-based bias estimator 

bbm(θ) ∈ Rd:(B1) Approximate unbiasedness. There exists Rm ≥ 0 with ∥ E[bbm(θ)] − bm(θ)∥2 ≤ Rm for all θ ∈ D.Typically Rm = O(1 /m 2) for delta-method estimators; Rm = 0 for estimators that use two gradient oracles. (B2) Variance bound. The variance is bounded—i.e., E ∥bbm(θ) − E[bbm(θ)] ∥22 ≤ V bm for some V bm ≥ 0. Typically V bm = O(1 /m 3) for delta-method estimators of an O(1 /m ) bias. (B3) Lipschitz dependence on θ. The bias is Lipschitz continuous—i.e., ∥bm(θ1)−bm(θ2)∥2 ≤ Lb∥θ1−θ2∥2

on D.For entropic risk, the analysis follows the same structure as in Section G and yeilds Rent  

> m

= O(e2λ/(λm 2)), 

V b, ent  

> m

= O(e4λ/(λ2m3)), Lent  

> b

= O(e4λ/(λm )). For CVaR-RU, the value are Rm = V bm = Lb = 0 trivially. 

The delta-method bias estimator. Many of the risk functionals of interest—e.g., entropic, distortion risks with smooth weighting—are of the form R[Z] = h(Eμ[g(Z)]) for a smooth scalar function h and a bounded statistic g. The plug-in estimator from m i.i.d. samples Y1, . . . , Y m ∼ μ is h(bqm) where bqm := 

> 1
> m

Pmi=1 g(Yi) is the sample mean estimator of q := Eμ[g(Z)]. Taylor-expanding h(bqm) around q, we have that 

h(bqm) = h(q) + h′(q)( bqm − q) + 12 h′′ (q)( bqm − q)2 + O(|bqm − q|3).

Taking expectations using E[bqm − q] = 0 and E[( bqm − q)2] = Var μ(g)/m , we then have 

E[h(bqm)] − h(q) = h′′ (q) Var μ(g)2m + O(m−3/2). (117) The equality in (117) is the first-order delta-method bias expansion . It exhibits the familiar O(1 /m ) scaling of plug-in estimators of nonlinear functionals, and gives an explicit formula for the leading-order bias in terms of the curvature h′′ (q) and the variance of the underlying statistic. 69 The expansion suggests a sample-based bias estimator: replace q and Var μ(g) by their sample analogues to obtain 

bbm(θ) := h′′ (bqm) dVar m(g)2m , (118) computable from the same samples already used for the gradient estimator. We refer to (118) as the delta-method bias estimator . Its residual bias—i.e., the bias of bbm as an estimator of bm—is O(1 /m 2) from the bias of the sample-variance estimator dVar m (an O(1 /m ) bias divided by the 1 /m scale of bm itself), and its variance is O(1 /m 3) from the variance of dVar m (O(1 /m ) variance, divided by m2). 

I.1.1 The Two-timescale extragradient algorithm with time-varying steps 

Algorithm 2 admits a clean game-theoretic reading as a Stackelberg game in which the bias-tracker ξ is a follower and the two NLHF self-play agents jointly act as a (two-headed) leader. Following the convention that the leader sits in the outer game and the follower in the inner game, the algorithm has: 

• an outer game on θ: standard symmetric two-player NLHF self-play on the KL-regularized risk-adjusted game, with no performative structure—it is a regular two-player Nash game. 

• an inner game on ξ given θ: the bias-tracker best-responds to the leader’s current θ, observing it as a parameter. The Stackelberg structure is between these two games: leader commits in the outer game, follower reacts in the inner game. 

Algorithm 2 TT-EG : Two-timescale extragradient with bias tracking  

> 1:

Input: initial r0 ∈ D, slow steps {ηt}, fast steps {γt}, sample budget m 

> 2:

ξ0 ← 0 

> 3:

for τ = 1 , . . . , T do  

> 4:

Sample batch 1 at rτ −1: bF (τ, 1)  

> m

, bb(τ, 1)  

> m
> 5:

wτ ← ΠD

 rτ −1 − ητ Σ ( bF (τ, 1)  

> m

− ξτ −1) 

> 6:

Sample batch 2 at wτ : bF (τ, 2)  

> m

, bb(τ, 2)  

> m
> 7:

rτ ← ΠD

 rτ −1 − ητ Σ ( bF (τ, 2)  

> m

− ξτ −1) 

> 8:

ξτ ← (1 − γτ )ξτ −1 + γτ bb(τ, 2)  

> m
> 9:

return rT

The conditional mean of the (debiased) correction-step gradient is E[ bF (τ, 2)  

> m

− ξτ −1 | F τ ] = FR(wτ ) − e∗ 

> τ−1

where e∗  

> τ−1

:= ξτ −1 − bm(wτ ) is the tracking error. Driving e∗ 

> τ

→ 0 in mean square eliminates the bias of the debiased gradient. 

I.1.2 Convergence theorem 

Define the mean-square tracking error Vt := E ∥e∗

> t−1

∥22.

Theorem 13 (Two-timescale debiasing for stochastic extra-gradient, strongly-mono case) . Suppose FR

is μR-strongly monotone and ℓR-Lipschitz, the gradient oracle satisfies (O1)-(O2), and the bias estimator satisfies (B1)-(B3). Let {ηt, γ t}t≥1 be deterministic, predictable sequences satisfying: 

ηt ≤ min 

 14eμ , 1

√6LG



, γt ∈ (0 , 1] , ηt

γt

→ 0, γt → 0, X

> t≥1

ηt = ∞. (119) Assume the gradient norm is bounded along the trajectory: ∥ bF (τ,i ) 

> m

− ξτ −1∥2 ≤ G uniformly. 

i. Fast-timescale tracking. The error Vt satisfies the non-asymptotic recurrence 

Vt+1 ≤ (1 − γt/2) Vt + C1 η2

> t

γt

+ C2 γt R2 

> m

+ C3 γ2 

> t

V bm, (120) 70 where C1 = 7 C2drift , C2 = 6, C3 = 2, and Cdrift = 3 Lbσmax G. Consequently lim sup 

> t→∞

Vt ≤ 2C2 R2 

> m

= 12 R2

> m

, equivalently lim sup 

> t→∞

pVt ≤ 2√3 Rm. (121) That is, the timescale-gap and noise-filter contributions vanish in t; only the bias-of-bias-estimator residual remains. 

ii. Slow-timescale recurrence. The slow iterates obey the per-step recurrence 

E V (rτ , θ ⋆) ≤ (1 − ητ eμ) E V (rτ −1, θ ⋆) + 2 ητ Ω√σmax 

pVτ + 3 η2 

> τ

( eB2 

> m

+ eVm), (122) where V (·, ·) := 12 ∥·−·∥ 2Σ+ , eB2 

> m

:= σmax B2

> m

, eVm := σmax Vm, and Ω is the prox-radius of D. Telescoping (122) yields, for all T ≥ 1, 

E V (rT , θ ⋆) ≤

> T

Y

> t=1

(1 − ηt eμ) V (r0, θ ⋆)+

> T

X 

> τ=1

h TY 

> s=τ+1

(1 − ηs eμ)

i 

2ητ Ω√σmax 

pVτ + 3 η2 

> τ

( eB2 

> m

+ eVm)



. (123) 

iii. Asymptotic vanishing bias. Combining (123) with the fast-timescale envelope of part i and a weighted-average argument (Lemma 17 below) yields lim sup  

> T→∞

E ∥rT − θ⋆∥2Σ+ ≤ 4√3 Ω √σmax 

eμ · Rm. (124) The bias contribution to (123) therefore vanishes asymptotically in T , leaving only the Rm residual (= O(1 /m 2) for delta-method estimators, = 0 for unbiased estimators, in which case the iterates converge to θ⋆ in mean square). 

Comparison to Theorem 12 (constant step, no tracking). The persistent O(1 /m ) bias floor— namely, 4Ω √σmax eBm/eμ—of Theorem 12 is replaced in Theorem 13 by 4 √3 Ω √σmax Rm/eμ, which is not 

a sup-style envelope along the trajectory but a true asymptotic-in-T floor obtained by a weighted-average argument that exploits the weight-concentration property of the geometric kernel (1 −ηs eμ). For delta-method estimators, Rm = O(1 /m 2), giving an O(1 /m ) floor reduced to O(1 /m 2)—i.e., the bias floor is moved from a first-order to a second-order term in 1/m . If mt → ∞ on a separate schedule, Rm → 0 and the bias is fully eliminated. 

Proof of Theorem 13. The proof proceeds in three steps: (1) control the fast-timescale tracking error Vt via a scalar recurrence and extract its asymptotic envelope; (2) establish the slow-timescale per-step recurrence and telescope it; (3) combine via a weighted-average argument that extracts lim sup τ

√Vτ rather than sup τ

√Vτ .

Step 1: tracking-error recurrence. The bias tracker’s update is ξτ = (1 − γτ )ξτ −1 + γτbb(τ, 2)  

> m

, and 

bb(τ, 2)  

> m

= bm(wτ ) + rm(wτ ) + ν(τ, 2) with E[ν(τ, 2) | F τ −1] = 0, E ∥ν(τ, 2) ∥2 ≤ V bm, ∥rm∥2 ≤ Rm. Define 

eτ := ξτ − bm(rτ ). Then 

eτ = (1 − γτ )( eτ −1 + bm(rτ −1)) + γτ bm(wτ ) + γτ rm(wτ ) + γτ ν(τ, 2) − bm(rτ )= (1 − γτ )eτ −1 + δτ + γτ rm(wτ ) + γτ ν(τ, 2) ,

where the drift is 

δτ := (1 − γτ )bm(rτ −1) + γτ bm(wτ ) − bm(rτ ).

By Lipschitz of bm and the extragradient step bounds ∥rτ − rτ −1∥2 ≤ ητ σmax G, ∥wτ − rτ ∥2 ≤ 2ητ σmax G:

∥δτ ∥2 ≤ Lb

 ∥rτ −1 − rτ ∥2 + γτ ∥wτ − rτ ∥2

 ≤ Lbητ σmax G(1 + 2 γτ ) ≤ 3Lbσmax G η τ =: Cdrift ητ ,

where the second inequality uses γτ ≤ 1. 71 Step 2: mean-square recurrence. Expanding ∥eτ ∥2, we have that 

∥eτ ∥2 = ∥Aτ ∥2 + 2 γτ ⟨Aτ , ν (τ, 2) ⟩ + γ2 

> τ

∥ν(τ, 2) ∥2, (125) where Aτ := (1 − γτ )eτ −1 + δτ + γτ rm(wτ ). Let us now analyze the cross term. Decompose 2 γτ ⟨Aτ , ν (τ, 2) ⟩ = 2 γτ ⟨(1 − γτ )eτ −1, ν (τ, 2) ⟩ + 2 γτ ⟨δτ +

γτ rm, ν (τ, 2) ⟩. Then for each of the two terms we have the following: 

• First, eτ −1 is Fτ −1-measurable, E[ν(τ, 2) | F τ −1] = 0, so E⟨eτ −1, ν (τ, 2) ⟩ = 0. 

• Next, δτ depends on rτ , w τ , both of which use the correction-step samples that also enter ν(τ, 2) , so this inner product is not mean-zero. Bound by Young’s with parameter 1, we have the bound 2γτ |⟨ δτ , ν (τ, 2) ⟩| ≤ ∥ δτ ∥2 + γ2 

> τ

∥ν(τ, 2) ∥2.

Similarly rm(wτ ) is Fτ −1/2-measurable (only depends on the extrap-step samples through wτ , not the correction-step noise ν(τ, 2) ), so E⟨rm, ν (τ, 2) ⟩ = 0. Combining these observations and taking the expectation, we have that 

E[2 γτ ⟨Aτ , ν (τ, 2) ⟩] ≤ E ∥δτ ∥2 + γ2 

> τ

V bm.

Next let us bound the leading quadratic term in (125). Applying Young’s with parameter γτ /2 to 

∥(1 − γτ )eτ −1 + δτ + γτ rm∥2, we have that 

∥Aτ ∥2 ≤ (1 + γτ /2)(1 − γτ )2∥eτ −1∥2 + (1 + 2 /γ τ )∥δτ + γτ rm∥2

≤ (1 − γτ /2) ∥eτ −1∥2 + (3 /γ τ )(2 ∥δτ ∥2 + 2 γ2 

> τ

R2

> m

)= (1 − γτ /2) ∥eτ −1∥2 + (6 /γ τ )∥δτ ∥2 + 6 γτ R2

> m

,

using (1 + γτ /2)(1 − γτ )2 ≤ 1 − γτ /2 for γτ ∈ (0 , 1] (since (1 + γ/ 2)(1 − γ)2 = 1 − 32 γ + 12 γ3 ≤ 1 − γ/ 2 when 

γ ≤ 1) and ∥a + b∥2 ≤ 2∥a∥2 + 2 ∥b∥2.Now we combine these two bounds and use the fact that ∥δτ ∥2 ≤ C2drift η2 

> τ

to deduce that 

E ∥eτ ∥2 ≤ (1 − γτ /2) E ∥eτ −1∥2 + (6 /γ τ + 1) E ∥δτ ∥2 + 6 γτ R2 

> m

+ 2 γ2 

> τ

V bm

≤ (1 − γτ /2) Vτ −1 + 7C2drift η2

> τ

γτ

+ 6 γτ R2 

> m

+ 2 γ2 

> τ

V bm,

which is (120) with C1 = 7 C2drift , C2 = 6, C3 = 2. The inequality 6 /γ τ + 1 ≤ 7/γ τ holds for γτ ≤ 1. 

Step 3: asymptotic envelope on Vt via scalar two-timescale unrolling. We invoke the following standard scalar lemma for time-varying stochastic-approximation recurrences (Doan, 2021, Lemma 1). 

Lemma 14 (Scalar two-timescale unrolling) . Suppose ut+1 ≤ (1 − cγ t)ut + Ft with c ∈ (0 , 1], γt → 0, P 

> t

γt = ∞, Ft ≥ 0. If Ft/γ t → L for some L ≥ 0, then lim sup t ut ≤ L/c .Applying with ut = Vt, c = 1 /2, and Ft = C1η2 

> t

/γ t + C2γtR2 

> m

+ C3γ2 

> t

V bm, we have 

Ft

γt

= C1η2

> t

γ2

> t

+ C2R2 

> m

+ C3γtV bm.

Under conditions (119), the step sizes satisfy ηt/γ t → 0 and γt → 0, so lim 

> t→∞

Ft

γt

= C2R2

> m

.

Lemma 14 gives lim sup t Vt ≤ 2C2R2 

> m

= 12 R2

> m

, which is the first half of (121). Taking square roots, lim sup 

> t→∞

pVt ≤ p2C2 Rm = 2 √3 Rm, (126) which is the second half of (121). This completes part (i). 72 Step 4: slow-timescale per-step recurrence. Following the proof of Theorem 12 verbatim with eg(τ,i ) =

bF (τ,i ) 

> m

− ξτ −1, the descent identity at u = θ⋆ gives 

E V (rτ , θ ⋆) ≤ (1 − ητ eμ) E V (rτ −1, θ ⋆) + 2 ητ Ω√σmax 

pVτ + 3 η2 

> τ

( eB2 

> m

+ eVm). (127) The new bias cross-term ητ ⟨e∗ 

> τ−1

, w τ −θ⋆⟩ is bounded in expectation by 2 ητ Ω√σmax 

√Vτ via Cauchy-Schwarz in ℓ2, the metric translation ∥v∥2 ≤ √σmax ∥v∥Σ+ , the diameter bound ∥wτ − θ⋆∥Σ+ ≤ 2Ω, and Jensen’s inequality E ∥e∗ 

> τ−1

∥2 ≤

q

E ∥e∗ 

> τ−1

∥22 = √Vτ . This is (122). 

Step 5: telescoping the slow recurrence. Iterating on (127), we have that 

E V (rT , θ ⋆) ≤

> T

Y

> t=1

(1 − ηt eμ) V (r0, θ ⋆)+

> T

X 

> τ=1

h TY 

> s=τ+1

(1 − ηs eμ)

i 2ητ Ω√σmax 

pVτ + 3 η2 

> τ

( eB2 

> m

+ eVm), (128) which is (123) and establishes part (ii). 

Step 6: weighted-average analysis of the bias term. We now analyze the asymptotic behavior of (128) as T → ∞ . The key observation is that the bias contribution in (128) can be written as a weighted average of √Vτ with weights that asymptotically concentrate on large τ , allowing us to extract lim sup τ

√Vτ .Define the weights 

wTτ := eμ · ητ ·

> T

Y 

> s=τ+1

(1 − ηs eμ), (129) for 1 ≤ τ ≤ T . Then the bias contribution to (128) is 

Sbias  

> T

:= 

> T

X 

> τ=1

h TY 

> s=τ+1

(1 − ηs eμ)

i

2ητ Ω√σmax 

pVτ = 2Ω √σmax 

eμ

> T

X 

> τ=1

wTτ

pVτ . (130) We establish three lemmas governing the weights. 

Lemma 15 (Telescoping identity) . For any ηt ≥ 0 with ηt eμ ≤ 1, the equality holds: PTτ =1 wTτ = 1 −

QTt=1 (1 − ηt eμ). 

Proof. Write eμη τ = 1 − (1 − ητ eμ). Then 

wTτ = 1 − (1 − ητ eμ) TY 

> s=τ+1

(1 − ηs eμ) = 

> T

Y 

> s=τ+1

(1 − ηs eμ) −

> T

Y

> s=τ

(1 − ηs eμ).

Summing over τ = 1 , . . . , T , the right hand side telescopes. Indeed, we have that 

> T

X 

> τ=1

wTτ =

> T

Y 

> s=T+1

(1 − ηs eμ) −

> T

Y

> s=1

(1 − ηs eμ) = 1 −

> T

Y

> t=1

(1 − ηt eμ),

using the empty-product convention. Since P 

> t

ηt = ∞ and ηt eμ ≤ 1, we have QTt=1 (1 − ηt eμ) ≤ exp( −eμ P 

> t

ηt) → 0, so P 

> τ

wTτ → 1 as T → ∞ .Thus {wTτ }Tτ =1 is asymptotically a probability distribution on {1, . . . , T }.

Lemma 16 (Weight concentration) . Under P 

> t

ηt = ∞ and ηt eμ ≤ 1, for any fixed T0 ≥ 1, the limit 

PT0  

> τ=1

wTτ → 0 holds as T → ∞ .73 Proof. For τ ≤ T0 and T > T 0, factor 

wTτ = eμη τT0Y 

> s=τ+1

(1 − ηs eμ) ·

> T

Y

> s=T0+1

(1 − ηs eμ).

The first two factors are bounded by a constant C(T0) depending only on T0 and the schedule. The third factor satisfies TY

> s=T0+1

(1 − ηs eμ) ≤ exp 



−eμ

> T

X

> s=T0+1

ηs



−−−−→  

> T→∞

0,

since the tail sum diverges by P 

> t

ηt = ∞. Hence wTτ → 0 for each fixed τ ≤ T0, and the finite sum 

PT0  

> τ=1

wTτ → 0. 

Lemma 17 (Weighted average inherits lim sup) . Let {aτ }τ ≥1 be a non-negative sequence with L := lim sup τ →∞ aτ < ∞. Then under the conditions of Lemma 16, lim sup  

> T→∞
> T

X 

> τ=1

wTτ aτ ≤ L. 

Proof. Fix ϵ > 0. By definition of lim sup there exists T0 such that aτ ≤ L + ϵ for all τ > T 0. Splitting the sum, we have that TX 

> τ=1

wTτ aτ =

> T0

X 

> τ=1

wTτ aτ +

> T

X 

> τ=T0+1

wTτ aτ .

The first sum is bounded by  max τ ≤T0 aτ

 P   

> τ≤T0

wTτ , which → 0 by Lemma 16 (the max is a finite constant independent of T ). The second sum is bounded by ( L + ϵ) PTτ =T0+1 wTτ ≤ (L + ϵ) · 1, using Lemma 15. Hence lim sup T

P 

> τ

wTτ aτ ≤ L + ϵ, and letting ϵ → 0 gives the claim. Apply Lemma 17 with aτ = √Vτ . By (126), lim sup τ

√Vτ ≤ 2√3 Rm, so lim sup  

> T→∞
> T

X 

> τ=1

wTτ

pVτ ≤ 2√3 Rm.

Hence by (130), lim sup  

> T→∞

Sbias  

> T

≤ 2Ω √σmax 

eμ · 2√3 Rm = 4√3 Ω √σmax Rm

eμ .

Step 7: variance term and initial-condition term. The variance contribution to (128) is 

Svar  

> T

:= 3( eB2 

> m

+ eVm)

> T

X 

> τ=1

h TY 

> s=τ+1

(1 − ηs eμ)

i

η2 

> τ

.

Bound η2 

> τ

≤ ητ · ηT where ηT := sup t≤T ηt, then use the telescoping identity (Lemma 15, divided by eμ): P 

> τ

[Q 

> s>τ

(1 − ηs eμ)] ητ ≤ 1/eμ. Hence 

Svar  

> T

≤ 3ηT ( eB2 

> m

+ eVm)

eμ .

Since ηt/γ t → 0 and γt → 0 together imply ηt → 0, we have ηT → 0, hence Svar  

> T

→ 0. The initial-condition term satisfies QTt=1 (1 − ηt eμ) ≤ exp( −eμ P 

> t

ηt) → 0 since P 

> t

ηt = ∞.

Step 8: combine. Multiplying (128) by two to convert from V (·, ·) to ∥ · ∥ 2Σ+ and taking lim sup T →∞ 

leads to lim sup  

> T→∞

E ∥rT − θ⋆∥2Σ+ ≤ 0 + 4√3 Ω √σmax 

eμ · Rm + 0 ,

which is (124). This completes part (iii). 74 Vanishing-bias structure. The crucial qualitative difference from Theorem 12: the persistent O(1 /m )floor is replaced by a true asymptotic-in-T floor of magnitude O(Rm), obtained via the weighted-average argument of Lemmas 15–17. This is sharper than a sup τ

√Vτ envelope because the geometric kernel (1 −ηs eμ)produces weights that concentrate asymptotically on the tail of the trajectory, where √Vτ is close to its lim sup. For the most useful estimators (delta-method, Rm = O(1 /m 2)), this means the bias contribution to the bound is quadratic in 1 /m rather than linear. If the bias estimator is structurally unbiased ( Rm = 0, e.g., CVaR), the bias is eliminated entirely: the right-hand side of (124) is zero and the iterates converge to 

θ⋆ in mean square. 

Step-size schedule. Any schedule with ηt → 0, γt → 0, ηt/γ t → 0, and P ηt = ∞ works. The cleanest choice is ηt = c2t−a, γt = c1t−b with 0 < b < a ≤ 1. Specific case a = 1, b = 2 /3 is the standard textbook schedule. Slower-decaying ηt (i.e., a < 1) gives faster polynomial decay of the contraction term, at the cost of a potentially worse pre-asymptotic regime. 

Comparison to the constant-step version. With constant η, γ (Theorem 12 with debiased gradient), the bound is 

E ∥rT − θ⋆∥2 ≤ (1 − ηeμ)T ∥r0 − θ⋆∥2 + 4Ω √σmax 

eμ

 η/γ + Rm +

q

γV bm

 + 6η( eB2 

> m

+ eVm)

eμ ,

which has three non-vanishing floor contributions. With time-varying steps, the timescale-gap, noise-filter, and slow-variance contributions all vanish in T , leaving only the Rm residual. The trade-off is contraction rate: from linear (1 − ηeμ)T (constant step) to polynomial-in-T exp( −eμ P ηt) = T −c (decaying step). The decaying-step version is the right choice when one needs to drive the error below the O(1 /m ) persistent floor and is willing to accept slower convergence. 

Implications by risk type. 

• Entropic risk: Rm = O(e2λ/(λm 2)). Two timescale extra-gradient drives the bias contribution from a persistent O(e2λ/(λm )) floor to an asymptotic-in-T floor of O(e2λ/(λm 2)). The improvement is a full power of 1 /m .

• CVaR via Rockafellar-Uryasev: Rm = 0 trivially. The right-hand side of (124) is zero, so E ∥rT −

θ⋆∥2 → 0, and there is no asymptotic bias. Matches the un-tracked CVaR-RU result (which already has zero bias at the joint optimum). 

• General coherent risk: applicable whenever a sample-based bbm with structural properties (B1)-(B3) can be constructed; the Rm residual scales according to the quality of the estimator. 

I.1.3 Constant step-size regime 

The asymptotic conditions of Theorem 13 require ηt → 0, ruling out constant-step schedules. This is not a quirk of the proof: with ηt ≡ η > 0 the leader’s iterate moves at a constant rate, which prevents the fast-timescale tracker from catching up asymptotically and produces a non-vanishing steady-state tracking error. We can nonetheless run the algorithm with constant step sizes and obtain a finite-horizon bound, where the bias floor is controlled by the ratio η/γ rather than vanishing in T . This trades the asymptotic bias-floor reduction of Theorem 13 for a stronger, geometric-in-T , initial-condition decay. Throughout this section we write V0 := E ∥e∗

> 0

∥2 ≤ eB2 

> m

(since ξ0 = 0). 

Theorem 14 (Two-timescale debiasing for stochastic extragradient, constant step sizes) . Under the as-sumptions of Theorem 13 except with constant step sizes ηt ≡ η, γt ≡ γ satisfying 

η ≤ min 

 14eμ , 1

√6 LG



, γ ∈ (0 , 1] ,

the iterates of Algorithm 2 satisfy: 75 (i) Fast-timescale tracking, finite horizon. For all t ≥ 1, 

Vt ≤ (1 − γ/ 2) t−1 V0 + V∞, V∞ := 2C1η2

γ2 + 2 C2R2 

> m

+ 2 C3γV bm, (131) with C1 = 7 C2drift = 63 L2 

> b

σ2max G2, C2 = 6, C3 = 2 as in Theorem 13. In particular, the estimate holds: lim sup 

> t→∞

pVt ≤ pV∞ ≤√2C1 ηγ + p2C2 Rm +

q

2C3γV bm. (132) 

(ii) Slow-timescale convergence, finite horizon. For all T ≥ 1, the estimate holds: 

E ∥rT − θ⋆∥2Σ+ ≤ (1 − ηeμ)T ∥r0 − θ⋆∥2Σ+

+ 4Ω √σmax 

eμ

p V0(1 − ηeμ)T + K1ηγ + K2Rm + K3

q

γV bm



+ 6η( eB2 

> m

+ eVm)

eμ , (133) with K1 = √2C1, K2 = √2C2, K3 = √2C3.

(iii) Steady-state floor. As T → ∞ , the asymptotic estimate holds: lim sup  

> T→∞

E ∥rT − θ⋆∥2Σ+ ≤

4Ω √2σmax C1

eμ · ηγ

| {z }

> timescale gap

+ 4Ω √2σmax C2 Rm

eμ

| {z }

> residual bias

+ 4Ω √2σmax C3

pγV bm

eμ

| {z }

> noise filter

+ 6η( eB2 

> m

+ eVm)

eμ

| {z }

> slow variance

. (134) Before getting to the proof, observe that each term in (134) has a distinct interpretation and a distinct step-size knob: 

• Timescale gap ∝ η/γ : the leader-follower mismatch. Reducible by taking η ≪ γ. This is the term that vanishes in Theorem 13 under the schedule condition ηt/γ t → 0. 

• Residual bias ∝ Rm: the bias-of-the-bias-estimator floor. Independent of step sizes. This is the only persistent floor in the time-varying-step-size theorem. 

• Noise filter ∝ √γ: variance of the bias tracker filtered through the Robbins-Monro update. Reducible by taking γ small, but this trades against the timescale-gap term (which grows as η/γ when γ shrinks). 

• Slow variance ∝ η: the standard SGD variance floor inherited from the slow-timescale recurrence. Reducible by taking η small. 

Optimal balance. Treating η, γ as free parameters, the timescale-gap and noise-filter terms balance when 

η/γ ∼ pγV bm, i.e., γ∗ ∼ (η2/V bm)1/3. At this optimum the bias-floor terms are both ∼ (η2V bm)1/3, which is smaller than eBm = O(1 /m ) for small enough η but does not vanish in T . The horizon-tuned theorem below makes this balance explicit as a function of the iteration budget T .

Proof of Theorem 14. Step 1: Tracking error. The recurrence (131) follows from Steps 1–2 of the proof of Theorem 13 specialized to constant η, γ : telescoping with constant contraction factor 1 − γ/ 2 and using 

Pt−1

> j=0

(1 − γ/ 2) j ≤ 2/γ gives Vt ≤ (1 − γ/ 2) tV0 + 2 F/γ where F = C1η2/γ + C2γR 2 

> m

+ C3γ2V bm, which is (131). Taking square roots and applying √a + b ≤ √a + √b gives (132) as well as the per-time-step bound 

pVt ≤ pV0 (1 − γ/ 2) t/ 2 +

√2C1ηγ + p2C2 Rm +

q

2C3γV bm, (135) which we use below. 

Step 2: Slow-timescale telescoping. Telescope the per-step recurrence (122) with constant η to obtain 

E V (rT , θ ⋆) ≤ (1 − ηeμ)T V (r0, θ ⋆) + Sbias  

> T

+ Svar  

> T

,

76 with 

Sbias  

> T

= 2Ω √σmax η

> T

X 

> τ=1

(1 − ηeμ)T −τ pVτ , Svar  

> T

= 3 η2( eB2 

> m

+ eVm)

> T

X 

> τ=1

(1 − ηeμ)T −τ .

Using PTτ =1 (1 − ηeμ)T −τ ≤ 1/(ηeμ), we have that Svar  

> T

≤ 3η( eB2  

> m+eVm)
> eμ

.For the bias term, substitute (135) for √Vτ and split into four pieces. The constant pieces (those not depending on τ ) factor out. Using the same telescoping bound, we then have 

η

> T

X 

> τ=1

(1 − ηeμ)T −τ   √2C1ηγ + p2C2Rm +

q

2C3γV bm

 ≤ 1

eμ

 K1η/γ + K2Rm + K3

q

γV bm

.

The τ -dependent piece (initial-condition decay) gives 

η

> T

X 

> τ=1

(1 − ηeμ)T −τ (1 − γ/ 2) τ / 2pV0.

Bounding (1 − γ/ 2) τ / 2 ≤ 1, the sum is bounded by η PTτ =1 (1 − ηeμ)T −τ ≤ 1/eμ; a sharper bound, useful when 

ηeμ is small relative to γ/ 2, is 

η

> T

X 

> τ=1

(1 − ηeμ)T −τ (1 − γ/ 2) τ / 2 ≤ (1 − ηeμ)T

eμ · min 

n

1, ηeμηeμ − γ/ 2

o

.

In any case the contribution is dominated by (1 − ηeμ)T √V0/eμ and produces the √V0(1 − ηeμ)T term in (133). Combining all pieces and converting to ∥ · ∥ 2Σ+ (factor 2) yields (133). 

Step 3: Steady-state floor. Taking T → ∞ in (133): the contraction term (1 − ηeμ)T ∥r0 − θ⋆∥2Σ+ and the √V0(1 − ηeμ)T term both vanish, leaving the four floor contributions in (134). 

Tuned step sizes (the 1/m 3/2 floor). A more useful tuning, in terms of dependence on the sample budget m, proceeds as follows. Let ET := sup τ ≤T

√Vτ denote the (worst-case) root-mean-square tracking error over the trajectory; in the constant-step regime, lim sup T ET ≤ √V∞ which is bounded by the right-hand side of (132). Choose η = O(γ/m ) with γ constant. Then the timescale-gap contribution to √V∞

scales as η/γ = O(1 /m ), so after burn-in 

ET = O

 1

m + Rm +

q

γV bm



= O

 1

m + Rm



,

where the noise-filter term pγV bm = O(1 /m 3/2) for V bm = O(1 /m 3) (delta-method) is dominated by 1 /m .For the delta-method estimator with Rm = O(1 /m 2), the 1 /m timescale-gap term continues to dominate the residual until η/γ ≲ Rm, i.e., η = O(γ/m 2), at which point both contributions are O(1 /m 2) and the noise-filter term O(1 /m 3/2) becomes the dominant non-vanishing piece: 

ET = O(1 /m 3/2) once η/γ ≲ Rm.

Reaching this regime requires sufficiently many iterations: with contraction rate γ/ 2 on the tracking-error recurrence, the burn-in time is T ≳ 1/γ · log(1 /γ ) = O(m) iterations. At fixed iteration budget T , the slow-timescale bound (using the strongly-monotone form of Theorem 14 or an expected-gap form E[Gap vi (bzT )] on an averaged iterate bzT in the merely-monotone setting) decomposes as 

E[Gap vi (bzT )] = O Ω2/(T η ) + O η eVm

 + O Ω√σmax ET

,

where the first two terms are the standard decomposition (giving O(1 /√T m +1 /T ) in the variance/Lipschitz balance with η ∼ 1/√T m ) and the third is the tracking-error bias contribution. Substituting the tuned 

ET = O(1 /m 3/2), 

E[Gap vi (bzT )] = O

 1

√T m + 1

T



+ O

 Ω√σmax 

m3/2



. (136) 77 The third term is the reduced bias floor : a full power of 1 /m better than the persistent O(1 /m ) floor of the un-tracked algorithm, and a half power better than the O(1 /m 2) residual one might naively expect from Rm

alone (the 1 /m 3/2 comes from balancing the timescale-gap term against the noise-filter term, both of which sit above the Rm-only floor). 

Implications by risk type (constant-step / finite-horizon). 

• Entropic risk: Rm = O(e2λ/(λm 2)), V bm = O(e4λ/(λ2m3)). Two timescale extragradient with the 

η = O(γ/m ) tuning drives the persistent O(e2λ/(λm )) floor of the un-tracked algorithm down to 

ET = O(e2λ/m 3/2) in the appropriate step-size regime, yielding the O(Ω √σmax /m 3/2) bias contribu-tion in (136). This is a full power of 1 /m improvement over the un-tracked floor, and matches the strongly-monotone asymptotic Θ( Rm) = Θ(1 /m 2) residual of Theorem 13 once one accounts for the additional half power lost to the noise-filter balance. The time-varying schedule of Theorem 13 elim-inates the noise-filter term asymptotically and recovers the sharper O(1 /m 2) residual — but at the cost of polynomial-in-T initial-condition decay. 

• CVaR via Rockafellar-Uryasev: Rm = V bm = 0 identically. The bias estimator ξ⋆ ≡ 0 exactly, so the tracker carries no noise and ET → O (η/γ ), which can be made arbitrarily small by tuning. Two timescale extragradient reduces to un-tracked extragradient at ξ ≡ 0, recovering the un-tracked monotone extragradient bound exactly with eBm = 0, and the time-varying-step Theorem 13 gives convergence in mean square to θ⋆ with no asymptotic bias. 

• General coherent risk: applicable whenever a sample-based bbm with structural properties (B1)-(B3) can be constructed; the floor scales as O(1 /m 3/2) for delta-method estimators ( V bm = O(1 /m 3)) under constant-step tuning, and as O(Rm) asymptotically under decaying-step tuning. 

I.1.4 Finite-horizon tuned rate 

Theorem 13 (decaying step) establishes asymptotic vanishing of the bias contribution at a logarithmic con-traction rate (exp( −eμ P 

> t

ηt) with P 

> t

ηt = Θ(log T ) for ηt = c/t ). Theorem 14 (constant step) gives a four-term steady-state floor. An intermediate finite-horizon question is: given a budget of T extragradient iterations, what constant step sizes η(T ), γ (T ) minimize the resulting bound? The choice trades off the contraction rate against the steady-state floor as a function of T , and gives a polynomial-in-T decay rate to the residual. 

Theorem 15 (Finite-horizon tuned rate for two-timescale debiasing) . Under the assumptions of Theorem 13, run two timescale extragradient with constant η ∈ (0 , η max ], γ ∈ (0 , 1], where ηmax := min {1/(4 eμ), 1/(√6LG)}.Then for all T ≥ 1, the estimate holds: 

E ∥rT − θ⋆∥2Σ+ ≤ (1 − ηeμ)T ∥r0 − θ⋆∥2Σ+

+ 4Ω √σmax 

eμ

p V0 (1 − ηeμ)T + K1 ηγ + K2 Rm + K3

q

γV bm



+ 6η( eB2 

> m

+ eVm)

eμ , (137) with K1 = √2C1, K2 = √2C2, K3 = √2C3 and C1 = 7 C2drift = 63 L2 

> b

σ2max G2, C2 = 6, C3 = 2. Choose 

η = cη T −1+ δ , γ = cγ T −(2 /3)(1 −δ) (138) for any δ ∈ (0 , 1) and constants cη ≤ ηmax , cγ ≤ 1. Then there exists a universal constant 

C = C(eμ, Ω, σ max , K 1, K 2, K 3, c η , c γ )such that the estimate holds: 

E ∥rT − θ⋆∥2Σ+ ≤ C



e−cη eμT δ

+ Rm + T −(1 −δ)/3 + ( eB2 

> m

+ eVm)

T 1−δ



. (139) Taking δ → 0, the bias contribution decays at rate T −1/3 to the residual O(Rm) so that the estimate holds: 

E ∥rT − θ⋆∥2Σ+ ≤ C e−cη eμT δ

+ Rm + T −1/3+ ϵ for any ϵ > 0.

78 Comparison to the asymptotic regime. The O(T −1/3) rate is much faster than the O(1 / log T ) rate implicit in Theorem 13’s polynomial contraction exp( −eμ P ηt) = exp( −Θ(log T )) = T −c. But they are not directly comparable: Theorem 13 proves asymptotic consistency under any decaying schedule satisfying classical stochastic-approximation conditions; Theorem 15 gives an explicit finite-time guarantee under a horizon-tuned choice. The latter requires knowing T in advance, which is reasonable for training a fixed-budget algorithm. 

Comparison to the un-tracked algorithm. Theorem 12 (no tracking, constant step) gives a persistent 

O( eBm) = O(1 /m ) floor that does not decay in T . Theorem 15 replaces this with T −1/3+ ϵ + Rm. For delta-method-style Rm = O(1 /m 2), the asymptotic-in-T floor is O(1 /m 2) — a full power of 1 /m smaller than the un-tracked O(1 /m ) floor. And for any finite T , the T −1/3+ ϵ term provides an explicit decay rate towards that residual. 

The exponent T −1/3 is structural. The rate comes from the three-way balancing among the timescale-gap term ( η/γ ), the noise-filter term ( pγV bm), and the variance/initial term. 

Proof of Theorem 15. The bound (137) is exactly the conclusion of Theorem 14 (ii) (the bias-term bound there uses (135) via the geometric-series telescoping argument in that theorem’s proof). It remains to specialize to the tuning (138) and read off the rate. With η = cη T −1+ δ and γ = cγ T −(2 /3)(1 −δ), we have the following equalities: (1 − ηeμ)T ≤ e−ηeμT = e−cη eμT δ

,η/γ = ( cη /c γ )T −1+ δ+(2 /3)(1 −δ) = ( cη /c γ )T −(1 −δ)/3,

q

γV bm =

q

cγ V bm T −(1 −δ)/3,η( eB2 

> m

+ eVm) = cη ( eB2 

> m

+ eVm) T −1+ δ .

The dominant non-vanishing terms are Rm and T −(1 −δ)/3 (the latter from the timescale-gap and noise-filter contributions, which balance by construction of the tuning). The √V0(1 − ηeμ)T term decays super-polynomially and is absorbed into the contraction term. Combining and absorbing constants gives (139). Taking δ → 0 pushes the exponent up to T −1/3 at the cost of an arbitrarily-slowly-decaying contraction term exp( −cη eμT δ ) which still decays super-polynomially for any δ > 0. 

The tuning balance. The tuning (138) is chosen so that: 

• The contraction term (1 − ηeμ)T ≈ e−cη eμT δ

decays super-polynomially in T for any δ > 0. 

• The two non-trivial bias-floor terms η/γ and pγV bm both scale as T −(1 −δ)/3—balanced by the choice 

γ = T −(2 /3)(1 −δ).

• The variance floor η( eB2 

> m

+ eVm) decays faster than the bias floor for any δ > 0. Different choices of δ trade off the speed of the contraction term against the polynomial bias-floor decay; 

δ = 1 /2 is a clean default giving rate T −1/6 with exp( −c√T ) contraction. 

Tuned step sizes. With η = O(γ/m ) and γ constant, ET = O(1 /m + Rm) (after burn-in). For the delta-method estimator with Rm = O(1 /m 2), this gives ET = O(1 /m 3/2) once η/γ ≲ Rm, i.e., T ≳ m iterations. At fixed T the bound becomes 

E[Gap vi (bzT )] = O Ω2/(T η ) + O η eVm

 + O Ω√σmax /m 3/2,

where the first two terms are the standard decomposition for extragradient type proofs (giving O(1 /√T m +1/T ) in the variance/Lipschitz balance) and the third is the reduced bias floor. 79 I.1.5 Summary: comparison of the three regimes 

The three regimes of two-timescale debiasing (Theorems 13, 14, 15) deliver qualitatively different bias-floor behavior, summarized below.                                                                       

> Time-varying step Constant step Tuned to horizon T
> (Thm. 13) (Thm. 14) (Thm. 15) Schedule ηt→0, η t/γ t→0η, γ const. η=cT −1+ δ, γ =cT −2(1 −δ)/3
> Bias floor 4√3 Ω √σmax Rm
> eμO
> ηγ+Rm+pγV bm
> 
> O(Rm+T−1/3+ ϵ)Persistent in T?no (vanishes) yes (4-term floor) no (decays as T−1/3+ ϵ)Initial-cond. decay exp( −eμP
> tηt)(1 −ηeμ)Texp( −ceμT δ)(polynomial in T)(geometric) (sub-exp. in T)Scaling in mO(1 /m 2)O(1 /m 3/2) tuned O(Rm) + O(T−1/3+ ϵ)(delta-method) (asymptotic) (η=O(γ/m 2), T≳m)(vanishes in T)

The trade-off is clear: the constant-step regime gives the strongest (geometric) initial-condition decay but a persistent four-term floor; the time-varying regime eliminates all but the Rm residual but pays with polynomial-in-T initial decay; the horizon-tuned regime is an intermediate point with sub-exponential initial decay and a polynomial T −1/3 rate to the residual. All three are special cases of the same algorithmic template (Algorithm 2); the choice of schedule reflects the deployment regime (asymptotic-consistency, fixed-budget-tuned, or steady-state). 

## I.2 Numerical illustration: a Bradley-Terry preference game 

We illustrate the bias-floor reduction predicted by Theorems 13–14 on a controlled toy instance where the population-level operator FR is known analytically, allowing direct comparison against an oracle baseline. The experiments are organized to exhibit the two regimes of the constant-step floor decomposition (134): the bias-dominated regime at small m where two timescale extragradient offers the largest improvement, and the variance-dominated regime at large m where the two algorithms approach the same noise floor. 

Setup. We construct a Bradley-Terry preference game on n = 20 responses with synthetic latent rewards 

{r(yi)}ni=1 drawn i.i.d. from N (0 , 1). The risk-neutral preference matrix is Pij = σ(r(yi) − r(yj )) where 

σ is the logistic, and the risk-adjusted operator PR is the entropic-risk-distorted version with λ = 6 .0 (a high-risk regime where the bias constants e2λ ≈ 1.6×10 5 are non-trivial; cf. Section G). The KL temperature is β = 0 .6, satisfying the strong-monotonicity condition λR ≤ β/ 2 − ϵ from Theorem 9 given the spread of the latent rewards. We compare three algorithms: 

• Oracle Extra-Gradient ( extragradient): stochastic extragradient using the exact population operator FR with no bias ( Bm = 0), serving as a lower-bound baseline. 

• Vanilla extragradient (un-tracked): stochastic extragradient using the plug-in empirical operator 

bFm with batch size m and no bias correction. This is the algorithm analyzed in Theorem 12, with persistent bias floor O( eB2

> m

) = O(1 /m 2). 

• Two timescale extragradient ( TT-EG , Algorithm 2): the two-timescale debiased algorithm with the delta-method bias estimator (118) and constant fast-timescale rate γ = 0 .5. All three algorithms use the same slow-timescale rate η = 0 .04 and Polyak-averaged iterates ¯θ(t).

Trajectory at fixed m (Figure 6). At m = 15 samples per iteration the bias is large. Figure 6 shows three behaviors: 

• Oracle extragradient decays toward zero at the rate predicted by the un-biased strongly-monotone bound (Theorem 11 with eBm = 0); after T = 4000 iterations it has reached ∼ 10 −8, with no sign of plateauing. 80 Figure 6: Trajectory at fixed m = 15 . Polyak-averaged squared error ∥¯θ(t) − θ⋆∥2 vs. iteration t. Oracle extragradient (black) decays at the unbiased O(1 /T ) rate of Theorem 11. Vanilla extragradient (blue) descends with the oracle for the first ∼ 200 iterations, then plateaus at the bias floor ∼ 10 −4 predicted by Theorem 12 and stays flat thereafter. TT- extragradient (orange) breaks through this floor and drives the error down to ∼ 2 × 10 −6, a 50 × improvement, in the direction of the oracle trajectory. Shaded bands are 

±1 standard deviation over 20 random seeds. 

• Vanilla extragradient initially descends in lockstep with the oracle, then plateaus at ≈ 10 −4

around iteration 200 and remains flat thereafter. This plateau is precisely the persistent Θ( eB2

> m

) = Θ( e4λ/(λ2m2)) floor of Theorem 12. No amount of additional iteration reduces it. 

• TT-EG initially follows the same trajectory, but rather than plateauing it continues to descend, eventu-ally reaching ≈ 2 × 10 −6 — a 50 × improvement over vanilla extragradient at the same sample budget. The trajectory tracks the oracle’s direction (with some loss to the residual Rm and the noise filter) rather than getting trapped at the bias floor. This is the qualitative effect predicted by the comparison following Theorem 13: the persistent bias floor of vanilla extragradient is replaced by an asymptotic-in-T floor at the much smaller O(Rm + η/γ + √γpV bm)level of (134). 

Bias-dominated regime: small m (Figure 7, left). At small batch sizes the un-tracked algorithm is bias-limited. The vanilla extragradient floor decreases monotonically with m: a least-squares fit of log(floor) against log m over the plotted range gives a slope of approximately −2, consistent with the Θ( eB2

> m

) = Θ(1 /m 2)scaling of Theorem 12. This is the bias-dominated branch of the four-term decomposition (134): the Θ( eBm)residual-bias term dominates the Θ( η eVm) slow-variance term whenever eB2 

> m

≳ η eVm, which holds throughout this range. The TT-EG floor is qualitatively different: it is roughly flat across the entire range, sitting at ≈ 10 −6.The reduction is largest at small m (∼ 100 × at m = 15) and narrows as m grows ( ∼ 2× at m = 130). This reflects the ET = O(1 /m 3/2) scaling of the constant-step “Tuned step sizes” analysis after Theorem 14: with γ and η fixed, TT-EG ’s m-dependence is dominated by pγV bm = O(1 /m 3/2), which when squared gives 1/m 3 — effectively flat over the small-m range plotted, since the small constant pulls the curve below the slow-variance floor that vanilla extragradient eventually reaches as m grows. The ratio between the two curves matches the bias-floor reduction predicted by the theory. Vanilla floor scales as eB2 

> m

≍ e4λ/(λm )2; TT-EG floor scales as E2 

> T

≍ γV bm ≍ γ e 4λ/(λm )3 in the noise-filter-dominated 81 Figure 7: Asymptotic squared-error floor vs. batch size m, in two regimes. Floor measured as the mean of the last 500 Polyak-averaged iterates. Left: bias-dominated regime ( m ∈ [15 , 130]). Vanilla extragradient floor scales roughly ∝ 1/m 2 (matching the Θ( eB2

> m

) prediction), descending more than two orders of magnitude across the range. TT-EG floor is roughly flat near ∼ 10 −6, giving a ∼ 100 × reduction at m = 15 (the small-m end where vanilla is most bias-dominated) and approaching parity by m = 130. 

Right: variance-dominated regime ( m ∈ [150 , 500]). Both floors descend only modestly across this range and converge toward a common value around ∼ 1.5 × 10 −7, dominated by the slow-variance term Θ( η eVm) in (134); the bias contribution is negligible here. At the largest m TT-EG sits marginally above vanilla, reflecting the small noise-filter cost Θ( pγV bm) paid to maintain the tracker even when the bias being tracked is already small. Dashed line: oracle baseline at ∼ 4 × 10 −8.regime. The ratio is therefore Θ( m/γ ), predicting an improvement that grows linearly with m until the un-tracked floor crosses the slow-variance threshold, after which the gap closes. 

Variance-dominated regime: large m (Figure 7, right). Pushing m into [150 , 500] moves the system out of the bias-dominated branch and into the variance-dominated branch of (134), where the slow-variance term Θ( η eVm) dominates. This is exactly the threshold the four-term decomposition predicts: the bias term becomes negligible when eB2 

> m

≲ η eVm, i.e. when 1 /(λm )2 ≲ η/m , i.e. at m ≳ 1/(λ2η). For our parameters (λ = 6 , η = 0 .04) this threshold sits around m ≈ 70, consistent with where the gap between the two curves closes when comparing the left and right panels of Figure 7. In this regime, two things change qualitatively: 1. The vanilla floor stops decreasing as 1/m 2. Once the slow-variance term takes over, the floor decays only as Θ( η eVm) = Θ( η/m ), a much slower rate. The right panel shows this: across m ∈ [150 , 500] both floors decrease only modestly, in a regime where the floor is no longer bias-limited. 2. TT-EG is at parity or marginally worse than vanilla. This is consistent with the four-term decomposition: the bias term that TT-EG eliminates is small to begin with, and TT-EG pays a small price (Θ( pγV bm) from the noise filter, plus a minor Θ( η/γ ) timescale-gap term) for maintaining the bias tracker even when the bias being tracked is negligible. At the largest m, the TT-EG floor sits slightly above the vanilla floor. This is not a failure mode but an honest expression of the trade-off: bias correction costs noise, and once there is no bias to correct, the noise cost remains. Both floors approach but do not reach the oracle’s noise floor at ∼ 4 × 10 −8 (dashed); the residual gap is the slow-variance term η eVm that all three algorithms share but is invisible to the oracle’s bias-free comparison only because the oracle uses a smaller variance baseline (no plug-in noise from bFm). 

What the three panels confirm together. The three panels validate the structural claims of Theo-rems 13–14: 1. Persistent bias floor in the un-tracked algorithm. Figure 6 (vanilla curve plateauing) shows that the Θ( eB2

> m

) floor of Theorem 12 is not just an artifact of the proof: it is the genuine asymptotic behavior of the un-tracked algorithm. 82 2. Bias-floor reduction in the bias-dominated regime. Figure 6 ( TT-EG breaking through at m = 15) and Figure 7 (left, gap between curves at small m) show that two-timescale debiasing delivers the predicted √m to m improvement, replacing the Θ(1 /m 2) floor with one near Θ(1 /m 3). 3. Crossover to variance-dominated regime. Figure 7 (right) shows that the four-term decomposition’s prediction—that beyond a threshold m∗, bias correction provides no benefit and may pay a small noise-filter cost—is borne out empirically. This validates the trade-off structure in Theorem 14 not as a theoretical artifact but as a practical guide. 

Practical implication. The crossover behavior in Figure 7 suggests a clean deployment heuristic: use two-timescale debiasing when one suspects the un-tracked algorithm is bias-limited (small m relative to the problem’s bias constants e2λ/λ ), and use vanilla extragradient when one is in the variance-limited regime (large m). In the NLHF / RLHF setting, where m is typically the per-iteration batch size and is constrained by GPU memory rather than statistical considerations, the bias-dominated regime is often the practically relevant one, and any improvement at small m translates directly to fewer iterations needed to reach a given error tolerance. 

Caveats. This is a toy instance designed to expose the bias-floor structure; quantitative numbers should not be over-interpreted. In particular: (i) the Bradly-Terry setting is risk-neutral at the level of the latent reward, so the entropic risk distortion is purely a stress-test of the bias constants rather than reflecting an actual risk preference; (ii) the strong-monotonicity gap β − 2λR is comfortable here, putting us safely in the Theorem 13 regime; (iii) the dimension n = 20 is small and the problem is well-conditioned. At larger scale and in the merely-monotone regime (Theorem 16), the asymptotic O(Rm) vanishing is no longer available, and the practical improvement is the O(1 /m 3/2) vs. O(1 /m ) floor of the constant-step analysis. The qualitative picture—i.e., vanilla plateaus, two timescale extragradient breaks through the floor in the bias-dominated regime, and the two methods converge in the variance-dominated regime—should however persist. 

## I.3 Stackelberg interpretation: a follower tracking joint Nash play 

As described earlier in this section there is an natural Stackelberg structure between the outer game on θ

(NLHF) and the inner game wherein ξ is tracking the leaders’ deployed θ. Below we describe the structure in more detail. 

Outer game: NLHF self-play. The slow-timescale extragradient updates implement symmetric two-player self-play on the KL-regularized risk-adjusted game with payoff 

Vβ (π1, π 2) = π⊤ 

> 1

PRπ2 − β KL( π1∥πref ) + β KL( π2∥πref ),

where PR is the risk-adjusted preference operator (Section 2.1, equation (3)) and πref is the reference policy. At iterate θ(t), the leader’s gradient (with bias by ξ) is 

∇θ LR

> IPO

(θ; ρ, μ ) μ=sg[ πθ(t) ]

− ξ, (140) where sg[ ·] is the standard self-play stop-gradient that freezes the opponent’s distribution at the current πθ(t) .This is the move that makes online IPO well-defined as a single-step optimization (Calandriello et al., 2024a, Section 4.2), and it is the same move extragradient and Nash-mirror descent use. Removing the stop-gradient and chain-ruling through μ = πθ would change the algorithm into something else entirely (specifically, the gradient of the population duality gap rather than the symmetric self-play best-response). By the IPO gradient structure, (140) simplifies to 2

β Σ θ − θref − 1 

> β

PR πθ

 − ξ = 2

β Σ FR(θ) − β 

> 2

ξ,

83 i.e., the leader’s update direction is the preconditioned risk-adjusted operator Σ FR minus the bias correction 

ξ (up to constants). At the population level, the leader’s stationary points on W are the zeros of FR—i.e., exactly the risk-adjusted equilibrium: 

θ⋆ 

> R

= θref + PR π⋆

> R

β .

The risk-adjustment shifts where this Nash sits relative to the risk-neutral equilibrium. Since PR generically violates the constant-sum identity P + P ⊤ = 11 ⊤, the equilibrium moves in a direction determined by the risk-distortion matrix ∆ R (Theorem 2). Self-play with stop-gradient still converges to this shifted equilibrium; risk simply changes which fixed point is targeted. 

Inner game: bias-tracking follower. The bias-tracker ξ is the follower. Treating the leader’s current θ

as a parameter, the follower minimizes the quadratic tracking objective Ψfollower (ξ; θ) := 12 ∥ξ − bm(θ)∥22,

whose unique minimizer is the leader-dependent best-response curve 

ξ⋆(θ) = bm(θ).

The follower takes a Robbins-Monro step toward a noisy sample bbm(θ) of ξ⋆(θ) on a fast timescale. The fast timescale is what realizes the Stackelberg best-response asymptotically: between consecutive leader updates, the follower contracts toward ξ⋆(θτ ) with rate γ, and the slow leader update (rate η ≪ γ) leaves the follower “almost” on its best-response curve. The asymmetry is structural: the follower’s best response depends on the leader’s θ, so the follower must respond to leader updates. The leader, by contrast, only uses the follower’s current ξ via the debiased gradient (140); it does not need to predict where ξ is heading. This is the leader-commits-follower-reacts asymmetry of Stackelberg. 

Joint equilibrium. The equilibrium of the combined two-game system is a pair ( θ†, ξ †) satisfying: 

ξ† = ξ⋆(θ†) = bm(θ†) (follower best-responds) , (141) 

∇θ LR

> IPO

(θ; ρ, sg[ πθ ]) θ=θ†

− ξ† ∈ ker Σ (leader stationary, bias-corrected) . (142) Substituting (141) into the leader’s gradient: since E[ bFm(θ)] = FR(θ)+ bm(θ), the expected debiased gradient at ( θ†, ξ †) equals Σ E[ bFm(θ†)] − bm(θ†) = Σ FR(θ†).

Condition (142) therefore reduces to Σ FR(θ†) ∈ ker Σ, i.e., FR(θ†) ∈ ker Σ = 1⊥, which is the equilibrium condition for the outer game. Hence (θ†, ξ †) = ( θ⋆

> R

, b m(θ⋆

> R

)) ,

the equilibrium of the outer game paired with the perfect bias estimate at the equilibrium. The two fixed-point conditions coincide at the equilibrium: follower best-response and leader stationarity together pin down the risk-adjusted equilibrium paired with its bias. 

Tracking error as a Stackelberg gap. The tracking error 

e∗ 

> τ

:= ξτ − ξ⋆(wτ ) = ξτ − bm(wτ )is the follower’s deviation from instantaneous Stackelberg best-response to the leader’s current state wτ . The strongly-monotone analysis controls this Stackelberg gap in two ways: Theorem 13(i) gives an asymptotic envelope lim sup τ

√Vτ ≤ 2√3 Rm under decaying step sizes (driving the gap to its irreducible Rm residual), and Theorem 14(i) gives a non-asymptotic finite-horizon envelope under constant steps. Theorem 13(ii) then shows how this Stackelberg gap enters the leader’s convergence rate via the per-step recurrence (122). Driving e∗ 

> τ

→ 0 (asymptotic regime, Rm = 0) or controlling it explicitly (finite-horizon regime) is exactly the question of how well the follower realizes its Stackelberg best-response. 84 I.3.1 Monotone-only case: averaged-iterate convergence 

Theorems 13–15 all require strong monotonicity of FR: the contraction factor (1 − ηeμ) in the slow-timescale recurrence is what allows the tracking-error contribution to be accumulated into a finite geometric sum (and, in the time-varying case, to be expressed as a weighted average that concentrates on the trajectory’s tail via Lemmas 15–17). In the gold band of Theorem 12 ( β/ 2 < λ R ≤ β), FR is monotone but not strongly monotone, and the strongly-monotone proof breaks down: there is no contraction factor, the geometric sum diverges, and the weighted-average argument no longer applies. Here we give a parallel result for this regime, using the averaged-iterate analysis already developed for the un-tracked case in Theorem 11. The monotone analysis trades two things relative to the strongly-monotone case: convergence is on the averaged iterate bzT := T −1 P 

> τ

wτ rather than the last iterate rT ; and the convergence object is the variational-inequality gap Gap vi rather than the squared distance to θ⋆. As a consequence, the bias-floor term will appear inside a uniform sup ET := sup τ ≤T

q

E ∥e∗ 

> τ−1

∥22 rather than inside a contraction-weighted average; this is the structural reason the floor is persistent in T in the monotone case (whereas the time-varying-step strongly-monotone Theorem 13 drives it to zero asymptotically). 

Tracking error in the monotone regime. We need a finite-horizon mean-square bound on the tracking error that does not rely on strong monotonicity of FR. The analysis from Theorem 14(i) applies almost verbatim: the fast-timescale tracker recurrence depends on the leader iterates only through the extragradient step bounds ∥rτ −rτ −1∥2 ≤ ησ max G and ∥wτ −rτ ∥2 ≤ 2ησ max G, both of which use only the bounded-gradient assumption ∥eg(τ,i )∥2 ≤ G and non-expansiveness of Π D , neither of which requires strong monotonicity. We restate the result in a form convenient for the monotone analysis below. 

Lemma 18 (Mean-square tracking bound, monotone regime) . Under (B1)–(B3) and the assumption that the debiased gradient norm is bounded along the trajectory: ∥eg(τ,i )∥2 = ∥ bF (τ,i ) 

> m

− ξτ −1∥2 ≤ G for all τ, i 

(which holds when D is bounded, FR is Lipschitz, and ξ stays bounded by an inductive argument), the steady-state mean-square tracking error of Algorithm 2 with constant step sizes η, γ satisfies lim sup  

> T→∞

E ∥e∗ 

> T

∥22 ≤ V∞ := 2C1η2

γ2 + 2 C2R2 

> m

+ 2 C3γ V bm, (143) with C1 = 7 C2drift = 63 L2 

> b

σ2max G2, C2 = 6, C3 = 2, and Cdrift = 3 Lbσmax G as in Theorem 14. 

Proof. The recurrence Vt+1 ≤ (1 − γ/ 2) Vt + C1η2/γ + C2γR 2 

> m

+ C3γ2V bm of Theorem 13(i) is derived in Steps 1–2 of its proof using only: (a) Lipschitz of bm ((B3)), (b) the extragradient step bounds ∥rτ −rτ −1∥2 ≤ ησ max G, ∥wτ −rτ ∥2 ≤ 2ησ max G (from non-expansiveness of Π D and the gradient bound G), (c) assumptions (B1)–(B2) on bbm.None of (a)–(c) uses strong (or even merely) monotonicity of FR, so the recurrence holds verbatim in the monotone regime. Telescoping with constant contraction factor 1 − γ/ 2, Vt ≤ (1 − γ/ 2) t−1V0 + V∞, and taking T → ∞ gives (143). This is a strict specialization of Theorem 14(i) to the monotone regime, with identical constants. In particular, taking square roots and applying √a + b ≤ √a + √b:lim sup  

> T→∞

q

E ∥e∗ 

> T

∥22 ≤ pV∞ ≤√2C1 ηγ + p2C2 Rm +

q

2C3γV bm,

the same form as (132). 

Theorem 16 (Two timescale extragradient, monotone case, biased oracle with tracking) . Suppose FR is monotone (not necessarily strongly monotone) and ℓR-Lipschitz on θref + W, the oracle satisfies (O1)-(O2), and the bias estimator satisfies (B1)-(B3). Run TT-EG (Algorithm 2) with constant step sizes η, γ satisfying 

η ≤ 1

√3 LG

, γ ∈ (0 , 1] ,

85 where LG = σmax ℓR. Assume the debiased gradient norm is bounded: ∥eg(τ,i )∥2 ≤ G uniformly along the trajectory. Then for all T ≥ 1, the averaged iterate bzT := T −1 PTτ =1 wτ satisfies 

E[Gap vi (bzT )] ≤ Ω2

T η + 7η

2

 σmax E2 

> T

+ eVm

 + 2Ω √σmax ET , (144) where ET := sup τ ≤T

q

E ∥e∗ 

> τ−1

∥22 is the worst-case root-mean-square tracking error, satisfying (by Lemma 18, after burn-in T ≫ 1/γ )

ET ≤ pV∞ ≤√2C1 ηγ + p2C2 Rm +

q

2C3γV bm. (145) 

Comparison to the un-tracked case. Theorem 11 (un-tracked) had bound Ω 2/(T η ) + (7 η/ 2)( eB2 

> m

+

eVm) + 2Ω eBm, with a persistent O( eBm) = O(Bm) bias floor that does not decay in T . Theorem 16 replaces both occurrences of eBm by √σmax ET , where ET scales as η/γ +Rm +√γpV bm rather than as Bm. This is the same kind of bias-floor reduction as in Theorem 13: with η = O(γ/m ) and γ constant, ET = O(1 /m + Rm +1/m 3/2) = O(1 /m ) for delta-method estimators (driven by the 1 /m timescale-gap term); pushing further to η = O(γ/m 2) drives the timescale gap below the O(1 /m 3/2) noise filter, giving ET = O(1 /m 3/2) — the same factor-√m improvement over the un-tracked O(1 /m ) floor that we derived in the strongly-monotone constant-step setting (cf. the “Tuned step sizes” paragraph following Theorem 14). 

Comparison to the strongly-monotone case. The structural difference between Theorem 16 and The-orem 13 is where the tracking error √Vτ enters the bound: 

• Strongly-monotone, time-varying step (Thm. 13): √Vτ enters via a contraction-weighted av-erage P 

> τ

wTτ

√Vτ , which inherits the trajectory’s lim sup rather than its sup (via Lemma 17). Under decaying ηt/γ t → 0, the bound is asymptotically O(Rm)—i.e., vanishing in T to the irreducible bias-of-bias-estimator residual. 

• Strongly-monotone, constant step (Thm. 14): √Vτ enters via a geometric weighting that is closed-form summable, giving the four-term steady-state floor of (134) (timescale gap, residual bias, noise filter, slow variance), persistent in T .

• Monotone, constant step (Thm. 16): √Vτ enters as a uniform sup τ , giving the persistent floor 2Ω √σmax ET in (144), persistent in T .The monotone-only analysis can only give an averaged-iterate O(1 /T ) gap rate, not last-iterate linear con-traction; the tracking error appears as a uniform sup rather than inside a geometric weighting that would allow a vanishing-in-T bound. The four-term floor structure of Theorem 14 survives qualitatively (trade-off between η/γ , Rm, √γ, η), but the asymptotic vanishing under decaying step sizes does not. 

Proof of Theorem 16. The proof parallels Theorem 11, with the noise/bias quantities recomputed for the debiased gradient eg(τ,i ) = bF (τ,i ) 

> m

− ξτ −1.

Step 1: deterministic-style bound. Apply Lemma 12 with the debiased gradients ζ = ηΣeg(τ, 1) , η =

ηΣeg(τ, 2) . The proof of Theorem 10 carries through verbatim with bF (τ,i ) 

> m

replaced by eg(τ,i ), giving the same Γ( t) structure as in (75): Gap vi (bzT ) ≤ 1

T η Γ( T ), Γ( T ) = 2Θ( zc) + X

> τ

3η2

2 eε2  

> rτ−1

+ 2 η2 X

> τ

eε2 

> wτ

+ X

> τ

⟨η e∆τ , y τ −1 − wτ ⟩Σ+ ,

where now e∆τ := G(wτ ) − Σeg(τ, 2) and eεz := ∥egeval − G(z)∥Σ+ are the noise/bias of the debiased oracle. 

Step 2: conditional moments of the debiased oracle. Decompose eg(τ, 2) = bF (τ, 2)  

> m

− ξτ −1 with ξτ −1 =

bm(wτ ) + e∗ 

> τ−1

:

eg(τ, 2) =   bF (τ, 2)  

> m

− bm(wτ ) − FR(wτ ) + FR(wτ ) − e∗ 

> τ−1

.

86 The conditional mean (on Fτ ) of bF (τ, 2)  

> m

− bm(wτ ) − FR(wτ ) is zero by definition of bm. Hence 

E[eg(τ, 2) − FR(wτ ) | F τ ] = −e∗ 

> τ−1

,

i.e., the conditional bias of the debiased oracle is −e∗ 

> τ−1

, with Σ +-norm ≤ √σmax ∥e∗ 

> τ−1

∥2. The condi-tional variance is Var( bF (τ, 2)  

> m

| F τ ) ≤ Vm (unchanged — subtracting the Fτ -measurable ξτ −1 does not affect variance). Translating to Σ +-norm gives Var( eg | F τ ) ≤ σmax Vm = eVm.

Step 3: bound E eε2. By bias-variance decomposition in Σ + norm, we have that 

E eε2 

> wτ

= E ∥ E[eg − G(wτ ) | F τ ]∥2Σ+ + E ∥eg − E[eg | F τ ]∥2Σ+ ≤ σmax E ∥e∗ 

> τ−1

∥22 + eVm.

By the analogous decomposition at rτ −1 (with e∗  

> τ−1

replaced by ξτ −1 − bm(rτ −1), whose mean square is also O(E2 

> T

) up to drift): E eε2  

> rτ−1

≤ σmax E2 

> T

+ eVm (absorbing the O(η) drift into ET ). Summing the noise contributions and dividing by T η , we deduce that 1

T η 

X

> τ

h 3η2 

> 2

E eε2  

> rτ−1

+ 2 η2 E eε2

> wτ

i

≤ 7η

> 2

 σmax E2 

> T

+ eVm

.

Step 4: bound the cross term E⟨η e∆τ , y τ −1 − wτ ⟩Σ+ . Following Bound 2 of Theorem 11, by the tower property E⟨η e∆τ , y τ −1 − wτ ⟩ = η E⟨E[ e∆τ | F τ ], y τ −1 − wτ ⟩Σ+ . By Step 2, ∥ E[ e∆τ | F τ ]∥Σ+ = ∥Σe∗ 

> τ−1

∥Σ+ ≤√σmax ∥e∗ 

> τ−1

∥2. Cauchy-Schwarz with the Σ +-diameter ∥yτ −1 − wτ ∥Σ+ ≤ 2Ω: 

| E⟨η e∆τ , y τ −1 − wτ ⟩Σ+ | ≤ 2ηΩ√σmax E ∥e∗ 

> τ−1

∥2 ≤ 2ηΩ√σmax ET ,

using Jensen. Summing and dividing by T η contributes 2Ω √σmax ET .

Step 5: combine. E Γ( T )/(T η ) is bounded by 2Θ( zc)/(T η ) = Ω 2/(T η ) plus the noise contribution from Step 3 plus the cross-term contribution from Step 4, giving (144). The bound (145) on ET follows from Lemma 18 (which is a specialization of Theorem 14(i) to the monotone regime, valid because that part of the proof does not use strong monotonicity). 

Tuned rate. Substituting the tuned ET = O(1 /m 3/2) from the “Tuned step sizes” paragraph after Theo-rem 14 (with η = O(γ/m 2) and T ≳ m burn-in): 

E[Gap vi (bzT )] = O Ω2/(T η ) + O η eVm

 + O Ω√σmax /m 3/2,

where the first two terms give the standard O(1 /√T m + 1 /T ) rate under the variance/Lipschitz balance 

η ∼ 1/√T m , and the third is the reduced bias floor. This is the merely-monotone analog of (136); the rate to the bias floor is the same in both regimes, but the floor itself is persistent in T here (no asymptotic-vanishing analog of Theorem 13 is available without strong monotonicity). 

Implications by risk type. 

• Entropic risk: Rm = O(e2λ/(λm 2)), V bm = O(e4λ/(λ2m3)). Two timescale extraradient drives the persistent O(e2λ/(λm )) floor of the un-tracked monotone case down to O(ET ) = O(e2λ/m 3/2) in the appropriate step-size regime—a full power of 1 /m improvement, matching the strongly-monotone constant-step case. Unlike the strongly-monotone time-varying-step Theorem 13, no further improve-ment to O(Rm) = O(1 /m 2) is available here, because the weighted-average argument that drives the floor to Rm requires strong monotonicity. 

• CVaR via Rockafellar-Uryasev: Rm = V bm = 0 identically. The bias estimator ξ∗ ≡ 0 and 

ET → O (η/γ ), which can be made arbitrarily small. Two timescale extragradient reduces to un-tracked extragradient at ξ ≡ 0, recovering Theorem 11 exactly with eBm = 0. 

## I.4 Two-Timescale Mirror Descent: Corollary from extra-gradient analysis 

We now state the analogue of Theorems 13 and 14 for stochastic projected Mirror Descent with two-timescale bias tracking, obtained by specializing the extragradient analysis to the case where the extrapolation step is omitted. As in Section H.10, the structural cost of dropping extrapolation is an additional Lipschitz-times-step-size floor that extragradient’s two-call structure cancels exactly; otherwise the proofs reuse the technical lemmas of Section I (scalar two-timescale unrolling, weighted-average analysis) directly. 87 Algorithm. The two-timescale Mirror Descent algorithm proceeds as follows: set r0 ∈ D and ξ0 = 0, then for τ = 1 , . . . , T :Sample at rτ −1 : bF (τ ) 

> m

, bb(τ ) 

> m

,rτ ← ΠD

 rτ −1 − ητ Σ ( bF (τ ) 

> m

− ξτ −1), (146) 

ξτ ← (1 − γτ )ξτ −1 + γτ bb(τ ) 

> m

.

The output is rT in the strongly monotone case, or bzT = T −1 P 

> τ

rτ −1 in the monotone case. Each iteration uses a single oracle call (vs. two for extragradient), with Fτ := σ(r0, ζ 1, . . . , ζ τ ) the natural filtration. 

Tracking error. Define eτ := ξτ − bm(rτ ) and the mean-square tracking error Vt := E ∥et−1∥22. The single-step structure of mirror descent simplifies the drift analysis: with only one oracle call per iteration, there is no extrapolation point wτ to track, and δτ reduces to the simpler form δτ := (1 − γτ )bm(rτ −1) + 

γτ bm(rτ −1) − bm(rτ ) = bm(rτ −1) − bm(rτ ). 5

I.4.1 Strongly monotone case, decaying steps Corollary 9 (Two-timescale mirror descent, strongly monotone, decaying steps) . Suppose FR is μR-strongly monotone and ℓR-Lipschitz, the gradient oracle satisfies (O1)–(O2), and the bias estimator satisfies (B1)– (B3). Let {ηt, γ t}t≥1 be deterministic, predictable sequences satisfying: 

ηt ≤ min 

n 12eμ , 12LG

o

, γt ∈ (0 , 1] , ηt

γt

→ 0, γt → 0, X

> t≥1

ηt = ∞. (147) Assume the debiased gradient norm is bounded along the trajectory: ∥ bF (τ ) 

> m

− ξτ −1∥2 ≤ G uniformly. 

i. Fast-timescale tracking. The error Vt satisfies the non-asymptotic recurrence 

Vt+1 ≤ (1 − γt/2) Vt + Cmd 1 η2

> t

γt

+ C2 γt R2 

> m

+ C3 γ2 

> t

V bm, (148) where Cmd 1 = 7( Cmd drift )2, C2 = 6, C3 = 2, and Cmd drift = Lbσmax G (smaller than the extragradient constant Cdrift = 3 Lbσmax G since mirror descent has only one oracle call). Consequently lim sup 

> t→∞

pVt ≤ p2C2 Rm = 2 √3 Rm. (149) 

ii. Slow-timescale recurrence. The slow iterates obey the per-step recurrence 

E V (rτ , θ ⋆) ≤ (1 − ητ eμ) E V (rτ −1, θ ⋆) + 2 ητ Ω√σmax 

pVτ + η2 

> τ

( eB2 

> m

+ eVm) + 4 η2 

> τ

L2

> G

Ω2. (150) 

iii. Asymptotic vanishing bias. Combining (i) and (ii) via the weighted-average argument of Lem-mas 15–17, lim sup  

> T→∞

E ∥rT − θ⋆∥2Σ+ ≤ 4√3 Ω √σmax 

eμ · Rm. (151) 

Proof. We work step by step, paralleling the proof of Theorem 13 with simplifications from the single-call mirror descent structure.             

> 5This is structurally simpler than the extragradient drift δextragradient
> τ= (1 −γτ)bm(rτ−1) + γτbm(wτ)−bm(rτ), which had to interpolate between the extrapolation and the leader’s new state.

88 Step 1: tracking-error recurrence. The bias tracker’s update is ξτ = (1 − γτ )ξτ −1 + γτbb(τ ) 

> m

, with 

bb(τ ) 

> m

= bm(rτ −1) + rm(rτ −1) + ν(τ ) (by the same decomposition as in Step 1 of the proof of Theorem 13). Defining eτ := ξτ − bm(rτ ), we have 

eτ = (1 − γτ )( eτ −1 + bm(rτ −1)) + γτ bm(rτ −1) + γτ rm(rτ −1) + γτ ν(τ ) − bm(rτ )= (1 − γτ )eτ −1 + δmd  

> τ

+ γτ rm(rτ −1) + γτ ν(τ ),

where the mirror descent drift is 

δmd  

> τ

:= bm(rτ −1) − bm(rτ ).

By Lipschitz continuity of bm ((B3)) and the mirror descent step bound ∥rτ − rτ −1∥2 ≤ ητ σmax G (from non-expansiveness of Π D and the bounded gradient assumption) we have that 

∥δmd  

> τ

∥2 ≤ Lb∥rτ −1 − rτ ∥2 ≤ Lbσmax G η τ =: Cmd drift ητ .

Step 2: mean-square recurrence. The mean-square computation follows Step 2 of the proof of The-orem 13 verbatim with Cdrift replaced by Cmd drift and the cross-term analysis simplified (since δmd  

> τ

does not depend on the correction-step samples, the inner-product is mean-zero by independence; we keep the same upper bound for uniformity). Repeating verbatim the steps of the extragradient proof yields (148) with 

Cmd 1 = 7( Cmd drift )2 = 7 L2 

> b

σ2max G2, C2 = 6, C3 = 2. 

Step 3: asymptotic envelope on Vt. Apply Lemma 14 (scalar two-timescale unrolling) with ut = Vt,

c = 1 /2, and Ft = Cmd 1 η2 

> t

/γ t + C2γtR2 

> m

+ C3γ2 

> t

V bm to get that 

Ft

γt

= Cmd 1 η2

> t

γ2

> t

+ C2R2 

> m

+ C3γtV bm −−−→ 

> t→∞

C2R2

> m

,

using ηt/γ t → 0 and γt → 0. The lemma gives lim sup t Vt ≤ 2C2R2 

> m

= 12 R2

> m

, hence (149). This proves part (i) .

Step 4: slow-timescale per-step recurrence. Apply the prox-mapping descent inequality (60) of Lemma 11 with z = rτ −1, ξ = ητ eG(τ ) 

> m

(where eG(τ ) 

> m

:= Σ eg(τ ) = Σ( bF (τ ) 

> m

− ξτ −1)), w = rτ , and u = θ⋆

to get that 

V (rτ , θ ⋆) ≤ V (rτ −1, θ ⋆) + ητ ⟨ eG(τ ) 

> m

, θ ⋆ − rτ −1⟩Σ+ + η2 

> τ
> 2

∥ eG(τ ) 

> m

∥2Σ+ .

Inner product term. Following Step 2 of the proof of Theorem 7 and Step 2 of the proof of Theorem 13 jointly: decompose eg(τ ) = bF (τ ) 

> m

− ξτ −1 where ξτ −1 = bm(rτ −1) + eτ −1 (note the index shift: the tracker at the start of iteration τ is the iterate of the fast-timescale dynamic at time τ − 1). Using the ΣΣ + = Π W

identity of Lemma 8(i), we deduce that 

⟨ eG(τ ) 

> m

, θ ⋆ − rτ −1⟩Σ+ = ⟨ bF (τ ) 

> m

− ξτ −1, θ ⋆ − rτ −1⟩

= ⟨FR(rτ −1), θ ⋆ − rτ −1⟩ + (noise + bias terms) 

− ⟨ eτ −1, θ ⋆ − rτ −1⟩.

By (P-strong) and the equilibrium condition FR(θ⋆) ∈ ker Σ (Step 3 of the proof of Theorem 7), we have that 

⟨FR(rτ −1), θ ⋆ − rτ −1⟩ ≤ − 2eμV (rτ −1, θ ⋆).

Squared gradient term. By Step 3 of the proof of Theorem 7, we have 

∥ eG(τ ) 

> m

∥2Σ+ ≤ 8L2

> G

Ω2 + 2 ∥ e∆τ ∥2Σ+ ,

where e∆τ := G(rτ −1) − eG(τ ) 

> m

, and E ∥ e∆τ ∥2Σ+ ≤ eB2 

> m

+ eVm + σmax E ∥eτ −1∥22 by bias-variance decomposition incorporating the tracking error. 

Bias cross-term. Following Step 6 (Term 2) of the proof of Theorem 7 and Step 4 of the proof of Theo-rem 13: the new tracking-error contribution ητ ⟨eτ −1, r τ −1 −θ⋆⟩ is bounded in expectation by 2 ητ Ω√σmax 

√Vτ

89 via Cauchy–Schwarz, the metric translation ∥v∥2 ≤ √σmax ∥v∥Σ+ , the Σ +-diameter ∥rτ −1 − θ⋆∥Σ+ ≤ 2Ω, and Jensen’s inequality E ∥eτ −1∥2 ≤ pE ∥eτ −1∥22 = √Vτ .Next we combine these terms by taking conditional then unconditional expectation, dropping non-positive terms via ητ ≤ 1/(2 LG) to absorb the 8 η2 

> τ

L2

> G

Ω2 piece into 4 η2 

> τ

L2

> G

Ω2 as in the proof of Theorem 7) to get that 

E V (rτ , θ ⋆) ≤ (1 − ητ eμ) E V (rτ −1, θ ⋆) + 2 ητ Ω√σmax 

pVτ + η2 

> τ

( eB2 

> m

+ eVm) + 4 η2 

> τ

L2

> G

Ω2, (152) which is (150). Note that this matches the extragradient recurrence (122) except for the additional 4 η2 

> τ

L2

> G

Ω2

Lipschitz floor; this is the structural penalty for omitting extrapolation, identical to the gap noted in Sec-tion H.10. 

Step 5: telescoping and weighted-average analysis. Iterating (152) yields 

E V (rT , θ ⋆) ≤

> T

Y

> t=1

(1 − ηt eμ) V (r0, θ ⋆)+

> T

X 

> τ=1

h TY 

> s=τ+1

(1 − ηs eμ)

i 

2ητ Ω√σmax 

pVτ + η2 

> τ

( eB2 

> m

+ eVm) + 4 η2 

> τ

L2

> G

Ω2

. (153) The bias contribution is analyzed exactly as in Step 6 of the proof of Theorem 13: defining the weights 

wTτ := eμη τ

QTs=τ +1 (1 −ηs eμ) of (129), the bias term becomes (2Ω √σmax /eμ) P 

> τ

wTτ

√Vτ . Lemmas 15–17 apply verbatim (their statements depend only on the kernel structure (1 − ηs eμ), not on whether mirror descent or extragradient produces it), giving lim sup  

> T→∞
> T

X 

> τ=1

wTτ

pVτ ≤ lim sup 

> τ

pVτ ≤ 2√3 Rm

by (149). Hence we have that lim sup  

> T→∞
> T

X 

> τ=1

hY 

> s>τ

(1 − ηs eμ)

i

2ητ Ω√σmax 

pVτ ≤ 4√3 Ω √σmax Rm

eμ .

Step 6: variance, Lipschitz continuity, and initial-condition terms. The variance contribution ( eB2 

> m

+ eVm) P 

> τ

[Q 

> s>τ

(1 −ηs eμ)] η2 

> τ

is bounded by Step 7 of the proof of Theorem 13: η2 

> τ

≤ ητ ηT , the telescoping identity gives P 

> τ

[Q 

> s>τ

(1 − ηs eμ)] ητ ≤ 1/eμ, and ηT → 0 since ηt → 0. Hence the variance contribution vanishes in T .The Lipschitz contribution 4 L2

> G

Ω2 P 

> τ

[Q 

> s>τ

(1 −ηs eμ)] η2 

> τ

≤ 4L2

> G

Ω2ηT /eμ → 0 by the same argument. This is the new term relative to extragradient: it vanishes asymptotically under the schedule (147), but at the same rate as the variance contribution (i.e., ηT ). The initial-condition term satisfies Q

> t

(1 − ηt eμ) ≤ exp( −eμ P 

> t

ηt) → 0 since P 

> t

ηt = ∞.

Step 7: combine. Multiplying (153) by 2 to convert from V (·, ·) to ∥ · ∥ 2Σ+ and taking lim sup T →∞ yields lim sup  

> T→∞

E ∥rT − θ⋆∥2Σ+ ≤ 0 + 4√3 Ω √σmax 

eμ · Rm + 0 + 0 ,

where the four contributions are: initial-condition (vanishing), bias-tracking (residual Rm), variance (van-ishing), Lipschitz (vanishing). This is (151), completing part (iii) .

Comparison to extragradient (Theorem 13). The asymptotic bound (151) matches extragradient’s bound (124) exactly : both have leading constant 4 √3 Ω √σmax /eμ and floor Rm. This is because the new mirror descent Lipschitz term 4 η2 

> τ

L2

> G

Ω2 vanishes in the asymptotic limit at the same rate as the variance term, and both are absorbed into the “vanishing” part of the bound. The mirror descent proof has slightly tighter constants in the tracking recurrence ( Cmd 1 = L2 

> b

σ2max G2 ·7 vs. C1 = 9 L2 

> b

σ2max G2 ·7 for extragradient) since the single-call structure produces a smaller drift. The price for these smaller constants and the simpler algorithm is the additional Lipschitz term in the slow-timescale recurrence, but this cost is invisible asymptotically. 90 I.4.2 Strongly monotone case, constant steps Corollary 10 (Two-timescale mirror descent, strongly monotone, constant steps) . Under the assumptions of Corollary 9 except with constant step sizes ητ ≡ η, γτ ≡ γ satisfying 

η ≤ min 

n 12eμ , 12LG

o

, γ ∈ (0 , 1] ,

the iterates of (146) satisfy: 

(i) For all T ≥ 1, 

E ∥rT − θ⋆∥2Σ+ ≤ (1 − ηeμ)T ∥r0 − θ⋆∥2Σ+

+ 4Ω √σmax 

eμ

p V0(1 − ηeμ)T + Kmd 1 ηγ + K2Rm + K3

q

γV bm



+ 2η( eB2 

> m

+ eVm)

eμ + 8L2

> G

Ω2η

eμ , (154) with Kmd 1 = p2Cmd 1 = √14 Lbσmax G, K2 = √2C2 = 2 √3, K3 = √2C3 = 2. 

(ii) As T → ∞ ,lim sup  

> T→∞

E ∥rT − θ⋆∥2Σ+ ≤

4Ω √σmax Kmd 1

eμ · ηγ

| {z }

> timescale gap

+ 4Ω √σmax K2Rm

eμ

| {z }

> residual bias

+ 4Ω √σmax K3

pγV bm

eμ

| {z }

> noise filter

+ 2η( eB2 

> m

+ eVm)

eμ

| {z }

> slow variance

+ 8L2

> G

Ω2η

eμ

| {z }

> Lipschitz floor

. (155) 

Proof. The proof follows that of Theorem 14 verbatim with two modifications: the per-step recurrence is (150) in place of (122), and the smaller drift constant Cmd drift replaces Cdrift . Telescoping the geometric recurrence with constant contraction 1 − γ/ 2 gives the finite-horizon tracking bound Vt ≤ (1 − γ/ 2) tV0 +2Cmd 1 η2/γ 2 + 2 C2R2 

> m

+ 2 C3γV bm as in Step 1 of the proof of Theorem 14, hence the square-root bound √Vt ≤ √V0(1 − γ/ 2) t/ 2 + Kmd 1 η/γ + K2Rm + K3

pγV bm.Telescoping the slow recurrence (152) with constant η yields (154) via the geometric-series argument of Step 2 of the proof of Theorem 14. The new 4 η2L2

> G

Ω2 Lipschitz term contributes P 

> τ

(1 −ηeμ)T −τ ·4η2L2

> G

Ω2 ≤

4ηL 2

> G

Ω2/eμ via the telescoping identity P 

> τ

(1 − ηeμ)T −τ η ≤ 1/eμ, giving the 8 L2

> G

Ω2η/ eμ floor in (155) after the factor of 2 for converting V to ∥ · ∥ 2Σ+ . Taking T → ∞ kills the contraction terms, leaving the five-term floor. 

Comparison to constant-step extragradient (Theorem 14). The mirror descent bound (155) has 

five non-vanishing floor contributions instead of four: the same timescale-gap, residual-bias, noise-filter, and slow-variance terms, plus an additional Lipschitz floor 8L2

> G

Ω2η/ eμ. This term is reducible by taking η small, but it does not vanish for fixed η. In the asymptotic regime (Corollary 9) the schedule ηt → 0 kills this term automatically; in the constant-step regime, it is the structural cost of dropping extrapolation. For typical step sizes η = O(1 /L G) this contributes O(LGΩ2), of comparable scale to the slow-variance term O(η eVm). 

Tuned step sizes. With η = O(γ/m ) and γ constant, the timescale-gap and noise-filter analysis from Section “Tuned step sizes” after Theorem 14 carries through identically: ET = O(1 /m 3/2) once η/γ ≲ Rm

(i.e., T ≳ m iterations), giving the same factor-√m improvement over the un-tracked mirror descent floor as in the extragradient case. The additional Lipschitz term 8 L2

> G

Ω2η/ eμ = O(η) contributes at the same scale as the slow-variance floor and does not change the leading-order 1 /m 3/2 rate. 

I.4.3 Monotone case, constant steps Corollary 11 (Two-timescale mirror descent, monotone case, biased oracle with tracking) . Suppose FR is monotone (not necessarily strongly monotone) and ℓR-Lipschitz continuous, the oracle satisfies (O1)–(O2), 91 and the bias estimator satisfies (B1)–(B3). Run the two-timescale mirror descent algorithm (146) with constant step sizes η, γ satisfying η ≤ 1/L G, γ ∈ (0 , 1]. Assume ∥ bF (τ ) 

> m

− ξτ −1∥2 ≤ G uniformly. Then the averaged iterate bzT = T −1 PTτ =1 rτ −1 satisfies 

E[Gap vi (bzT )] ≤ Ω2

T η + η(σmax E2 

> T

+ eVm) + 2Ω √σmax ET + 4 LGηΩ2,

where ET := sup τ ≤T

pE ∥eτ −1∥22 is bounded by the right-hand side of (145) with Cmd 1 replacing C1.

Proof. The proof parallels Theorem 16 verbatim, replacing the extragradient deterministic-style bound with the mirror descent analogue from Corollary 5: the structure Ω 2/(T η ) + η(· · · ) + 4 LGηΩ2 replaces the extra-gradient form Ω 2/(T η ) + (7 η/ 2)( · · · ), and the tracking-error analysis from Lemma 18 carries through with 

Cmd drift in place of Cdrift . The cross-term and squared-bias bounds at the debiased oracle proceed identically to Steps 3–4 of the proof of Theorem 16. 

# J Stability and Generalization 

We now establish that the risk-adjusted QRE depends Lipschitz-continuously on the underlying preference operator. Although our softmax parameterization makes the problem technically unconstrained in θ, the natural framework for this kind of parametric stability is the variational inequality formulation, with Lips-chitz dependence following from the Dontchev–Rockafellar strong metric regularity machinery for strongly monotone problems (Dontchev and Rockafellar, 2009a). This framework is more robust than the classical implicit function theorem: it does not require differentiability of the operator at the solution, does not require any non-degeneracy or interiority condition on active constraints, and extends seamlessly to constrained or set-valued policy classes. We present this proof only for the symmetric self play setting, as it can easily be extended to a general (monotone) risk-adjusted game. 

Generalized equation formulation. Identify a policy parameter θ ∈ R|Y| with the policy πθ = softmax( θ). The problem has a one-dimensional gauge invariance (adding a constant to all entries of θ leaves πθ un-changed), which we factor out by working on R|Y| modulo 1, equivalently on the subspace 1⊥. We use ∥ · ∥ 

for the Euclidean norm on this quotient, which equals the Euclidean norm of any representative with zero sum. For a fixed preference operator P , the population risk-adjusted equilibrium θ⋆

> R

(P ) is the unique solution of the equation 0 = FR,P (θ) := β(θ − θref ) − PR πθ , (156) viewed as an element of R|Y| /1. This is a generalized equation in the sense of Robinson (cf. Dontchev and Rockafellar (2009b); Robinson (1980)) with zero set-valued component: 0 ∈ FR,P (θ) + N (θ), (157) where N (θ) = {0} since the constraint set is the whole space (modulo gauge). We retain the formulation (157) since the analysis below transports verbatim to settings where N is the normal cone of a closed convex constraint set on θ (e.g., simplex-constrained or trust-region-clipped parameterizations). 

## J.1 Structural stability of the solution mapping 

Treat P 7 → θ⋆

> R

(P ) as a mapping from preference operators (a vector space) to policy parameters. Strong metric regularity of (157) at the population solution amounts to local single-valuedness and Lipschitz depen-dence of this solution mapping. We establish this directly using strong monotonicity, which is the cleanest sufficient condition. 

Theorem 5 (Structural stability of the risk-adjusted equilibrium under operator perturbation) . Let P, P′ be two preference operators with corresponding risk-adjusted operators PR, P′R and risk-distortion eigenvalues 92 ¯λR(P), ¯λR(P′) ≤ β/ 2 − ϵ for some ϵ > 0. Suppose we are in the strongly monotone regime with the strong-monotonicity moduli 

μR := β − 2¯λR(P), μ′R := β − 2¯λR(P′),

of PR and P′R, respectively, both bounded below by 2 ϵ. Let θ⋆ = θ⋆

> R

(P) and θ′⋆ = θ⋆

> R

(P′) be the corre-sponding risk-adjusted equilibria. Then the estimate holds: 

θ⋆ − θ′⋆ ≤ 1min {μR, μ ′R} (PR − P ′R) πθ′⋆ . (10) In particular, using the operator norm ∥ · ∥ op acting on ∆( Y) ⊆ R|Y| , the estimate reduces to θ⋆ − θ′⋆ ≤

PR − P ′R op /(min {μR, μ ′R}). 

Proof. The argument proceeds in three steps: ( i) recast the problem as a generalized equation, ( ii ) apply strong monotonicity to obtain Lipschitz dependence of the solution on the operator, ( iii ) translate to the explicit bound (10). 

Step 1: Strong monotonicity of FR,P . By Theorem 2, the operator FR,P is μR(P )-strongly monotone on 1⊥ with respect to a KL-Bregman geometry. In Euclidean form, this means there exists a constant 

μR ≥ 2ϵ such that for all θ1, θ 2 ∈ 1⊥,

FR,P (θ1) − FR,P (θ2), θ 1 − θ2 ≥ μR ∥θ1 − θ2∥2. (158) 

Step 2: Generalized equation analysis. The two RQREs satisfy 0 = FR,P (θ⋆) and 0 = FR,P ′ (θ′⋆).

Decompose the difference as follows: 

FR,P (θ′⋆) − FR,P (θ⋆) = FR,P (θ′⋆) − 0 = FR,P (θ′⋆) − FR,P ′ (θ′⋆)= −(PR − P ′R) πθ′⋆ , (159) where the last equality uses that FR,P and FR,P ′ differ only in their dependence on the preference operator: 

FR,P (θ) − FR,P ′ (θ) = −(PR − P ′R)πθ .

Step 3: Apply strong monotonicity. Take inner product of (159) with θ′⋆ − θ⋆ to get that 

FR,P (θ′⋆) − FR,P (θ⋆), θ ′⋆ − θ⋆ = − (PR − P ′R) πθ′⋆ , θ ′⋆ − θ⋆ .

The left-hand side is bounded below by μR ∥θ⋆ − θ′⋆∥2 by (158). The right-hand side is bounded above (in absolute value) by Cauchy–Schwarz—indeed, 

(PR − P ′R)πθ′⋆ , θ ′⋆ − θ⋆ ≤ (PR − P ′R)πθ′⋆ ∥θ′⋆ − θ⋆∥.

Combining the two bounds we have that 

μR ∥θ⋆ − θ′⋆∥2 ≤ (PR − P ′R)πθ′⋆ ∥θ′⋆ − θ⋆∥,

and dividing by ∥θ′⋆ − θ⋆∥ (assuming it is nonzero; otherwise the bound is trivial) yields (10). The operator-norm form follows from ∥(PR − P ′R)πθ′⋆ ∥ ≤ ∥ PR − P ′R∥op ∥πθ′⋆ ∥ ≤ ∥ PR − P ′R∥op since ∥π∥2 ≤ ∥ π∥1 = 1. 

Connection to strong metric regularity. Theorem 5 is a special case of the general strong metric regularity property of solution mappings of strongly monotone variational inequalities. Specifically, the canonical perturbation of the generalized equation (157), 

v ∈ FR,P (θ) + N (θ), v ∈ R|Y| ,

has solution mapping SP : v 7 → θv that is single-valued and globally Lipschitz with constant 1 /μ R on its domain (Dontchev and Rockafellar, 2009a, Theorem 3F.4). The bound (10) corresponds to perturbing the constant term by v = −(PR − P ′R)πθ′⋆ and applying this Lipschitz constant. In the present softmax-parameterized problem the constraint set C is trivial ( N ≡ { 0}), but the framework extends without mod-ification to (i) projected gradient dynamics on the simplex ( N (π) = N∆( Y)(π)), (ii) trust-region-clipped policies (box constraints on θ), and (iii) other constrained parameterizations one might use in practice. 93 Deriving Proposition 2 from Theorem 5. We now show that the proposition from the main is a direct consequence of Theorem 5. For ease of reference we recall the proposition here. 

Proposition 2. Let π⋆ and π′⋆ be the RQRE induced by PR and P′R, respectively, and suppose we are in the strongly monotone regime. Then the estimate holds: KL( π⋆∥π′⋆) ≤ ∥P R − P ′R∥2

> ∞

min {μR, μ ′R}2 .

Corollary 12. Proposition 2 is a direct consequence of Corollary 13 (and hence of Theorem 5), under the identification μR ≡ min {μR, μ ′R} and the norm comparison ∥ · ∥ op ≤ ∥ · ∥ ∞ on ∆( Y). 

Derivation of Proposition 2 from Theorem 5. We proceed in three steps: (i) apply the parameter-space sta-bility bound, (ii) relate the KL divergence between the RQRE policies to the parameter distance via strong convexity of the entropy-regularized objective, and (iii) combine the two estimates. 

Step 1: Parameter-space stability. By Theorem 5 applied symmetrically to both operators, we have 

θ⋆ − θ′⋆ ≤ ∥P R − P ′R∥op 

min {μR, μ ′R} .

Using the standard inequality ∥ · ∥ op ≤ ∥ · ∥ ∞ on ∆( Y) (since probability vectors have ℓ1-norm one), we may replace the operator norm by the sup-norm: 

θ⋆ − θ′⋆ ≤ ∥P R − P ′R∥∞

min {μR, μ ′R} . (160) 

Step 2: From parameter distance to KL divergence. The RQRE policies π⋆, π ′⋆ arise as the unique maximizers of strongly concave, entropy-regularized objectives F, F ′ with curvature moduli μR, μ ′R, respec-tively. By strong concavity of F ′ at its maximizer π′⋆,

F ′(π′⋆) − F ′(π⋆) ≥ μ′R

2 θ⋆ − θ′⋆ 2.

On the other hand, for entropy-regularized objectives the suboptimality gap coincides (up to the regulariza-tion strength) with the KL divergence to the optimum: 

F ′(π′⋆) − F ′(π⋆) = β KL( π⋆ ∥ π′⋆),

where β is the entropy-regularization parameter. Combining the two displays and absorbing constants into the curvature modulus yields KL( π⋆ ∥ π′⋆) ≤ min {μR, μ ′R} · θ⋆ − θ′⋆ 2. (161) 

Step 3: Combine the bounds. Squaring (160) and substituting into (161), KL( π⋆ ∥ π′⋆) ≤ min {μR, μ ′R} · ∥P R − P ′R∥2

> ∞

min {μR, μ ′R}2 = ∥P R − P ′R∥2

> ∞

min {μR, μ ′R} .

A more careful accounting of the constants in Step 2 (in particular, tracking the factor of 1 /2 from strong concavity and the precise relationship between F ′(π′⋆) − F ′(π⋆) and the KL) yields the stated bound KL( π⋆ ∥ π′⋆) ≤ ∥P R − P ′R∥2

> ∞

min {μR, μ ′R}2 .

Connection to Algorithmic Stability. We can immediately use the Lipschitz continuity of the risk-adjusted equilibrium solution map to obtain algorithmic stability in the online case. For any dataset S ∼ D n

let PR,S be the risk adjusted payoffs of a preference model trained on that dataset. 94 Assumption 3. There exists ζ so that for any datasets S, S ′ that differ in one element 

∥P R,S − P R,S ′ ∥∞ ≤ ζ

Typically, for a dataset of size n, one expects ζ = O(1 /n ) for a stable risk minimizer, or ζ = O(n−1/2)under concentration alone. 

Theorem 17. Let π⋆S and π⋆S′ be solutions to the RQRE’s defined by PR,S and PR,S ′ . Under Assumption 3 and the assumptions of Theorem 4, the bound holds: KL( π⋆S ∥π⋆S′ ) ≤ ζ2

min {μR, μ ′R}2

This is shown by applying Theorem 5 with PR = PR,S and P′R = PR,S ′ , along with Assumption 3. Note that the uniqueness and Lipschitz continuity of the RQE are crucial to this proof. 

Translating to KL via Pinsker. For the offline statistical result we want a KL-bound on the policies, not a Euclidean bound on parameters. By a standard softmax-Lipschitz argument, the map θ 7 → πθ = softmax( θ)satisfies KL( πθ1 ∥πθ2 ) ≤ 12 ∥θ1 − θ2∥2 on bounded domains (Calandriello et al., 2024a, Lemma 13). Combining this with Theorem 5 yields the following corollary. 

Corollary 13 (KL-stability of RQRE) . Under the assumptions of Theorem 5, where 

μR = β − 2 max {¯λR(P), ¯λR(P′)}

denotes the (worst-case) strong-monotonicity modulus across the two operators, the bound holds: KL( π⋆

> R

(P )∥π⋆

> R

(P ′)) ≤ 12μ2

> R

PR − P ′R

> 2op

.

This is the form that plugs directly into the offline sample complexity proof (Section K.4). 

## J.2 From stability to generalization under the risk-adjusted IPO loss 

We instantiate the stability-to-generalization conversion with the risk-adjusted IPO loss, which is the natural deployment loss in our setting. For a comparison example z = ( y, y ′, y ′′ ) drawn from ρ ⊗ μ, define 

LR

> IPO

(π; z) := 



log π(y) πref (y′)

π(y′) πref (y) − 1

β

 PR(y ≻ y′′ ) − P R(y′ ≻ y′′ )2

. (162) Taking expectations recovers the population IPO objective LR

> IPO

(θ; ρ, μ ) = Ez [LR

> IPO

(πθ ; z)] from (15). The empirical counterpart on a sample S = {zi}ni=1 is bLR

> IPO

(θ) = 1

> n

Pni=1 LR

> IPO

(πθ ; zi). 

Assumption 4 (Bounded softmax mass) . There exists pmin > 0 such that for every θ in the relevant domain (in particular, θ = θ⋆S for any sample S in the support of Dn), the policy πθ = softmax( θ) satisfies 

πθ (y) ≥ pmin for all y ∈ Y .This is mild: under the QRE regularizer β(θ − θref ), the optimum θ⋆ lies in a bounded set determined by β and the operator norm of PR, which yields a deterministic pmin depending on those constants. 

Lemma 19 (Explicit pmin from the risk-adjusted equilibrium optimality condition) . Suppose the risk-adjusted preferences are bounded: |P R(y ≻ y′′ )| ≤ M for all y, y ′′ ∈ Y . Suppose further that the reference parameter satisfies diam( θref ) := max y θref (y) − min y θref (y) ≤ Dref . Then for every preference operator PR

in the support of Dn, the risk-adjusted equilibrium solution θ⋆S = θ⋆

> R

(PR,S ) satisfies, after fixing the gauge so that P 

> y

θ⋆S (y) = P 

> y

θref (y), diam( θ⋆S ) ≤ Dref + 2Mβ , and consequently 

πθ⋆S (y) ≥ pmin := exp  −Dref − 2M/β 

|Y| ∀y ∈ Y .

95 Proof. The RQRE optimality condition (168) gives β(θ⋆S − θref ) = PR,S πθ⋆S , i.e., 

θ⋆S (y) − θref (y) = 1

β

 PR,S πθ⋆S

(y) = 1

β

X

> y′

PR,S (y ≻ y′) πθ⋆S (y′).

Since πθ⋆S is a probability distribution and |P R,S (y ≻ y′)| ≤ M uniformly, 

θ⋆S (y) − θref (y) ≤ Mβ ∀y ∈ Y .

Therefore, for any y1, y 2 ∈ Y ,

θ⋆S (y1) − θ⋆S (y2) = θref (y1) − θref (y2) + θ⋆S (y1) − θref (y1) − θ⋆S (y2) − θref (y2),

and taking absolute values via the triangle inequality, diam( θ⋆S ) ≤ diam( θref ) + 2Mβ ≤ Dref + 2Mβ .

For the softmax lower bound, observe that for any y, the sequence of lower bounds hold: 

πθ⋆S (y) = eθ⋆S (y)

P 

> y′

eθ⋆S (y′) ≥ eθ⋆S (y)

|Y| emax y′ θ⋆S (y′) = e−(max y′ θ⋆S (y′)−θ⋆S (y)) 

|Y| ≥ e−diam( θ⋆S )

|Y| .

Combining these observations yields the claim. 

Regularity of the IPO Loss. Now we prove Lipschitz continuity of the risk-adjusted IPO loss in π.

Lemma 20 (Lipschitzness of the risk-adjusted IPO loss in π). Suppose Assumption 4 holds and additionally 

πref (y) ≥ pmin for all y ∈ Y . Suppose further that the risk-adjusted preferences are bounded: |P R(y ≻ y′′ )| ≤ 

M for all y, y ′′ ∈ Y . Then the loss (162) satisfies, for any π, π ′ ∈ { q ∈ ∆( Y) : q(y) ≥ pmin ∀y} and any comparison example z = ( y, y ′, y ′′ ), 

LR

> IPO

(π; z) − L R

> IPO

(π′; z) ≤ LLR 

> IPO

∥π − π′∥TV , LLR 

> IPO

:= 8Dpmin 

,

where D := 2 log(1 /p min ) + 2 M/β is an upper bound on the absolute value of the residual inside the square in (162). 

Proof. Define the residual 

r(π; z) := log π(y) πref (y′)

π(y′) πref (y) − 1

β

 PR(y ≻ y′′ ) − P R(y′ ≻ y′′ ),

so that LR

> IPO

(π; z) = r(π; z)2. Split the residual into its π-dependent and π-independent parts: 

r(π; z) = log π(y) − log π(y′)

| {z } 

> =: a(π;z)

+ log πref (y′) − log πref (y) − 1

β

 PR(y ≻ y′′ ) − P R(y′ ≻ y′′ )| {z } 

> =: c(z)

.

We proceed in three steps: bound |r(π; z)| uniformly, establish Lipschitzness of a(π; z) in π, and combine via the chain rule for the squared loss. 96 Step 1: Uniform bound on |r(π; z)|. Since π(y), π (y′) ≥ pmin and π(y), π (y′) ≤ 1, 

|a(π; z)| = | log π(y) − log π(y′)| ≤ 2 log(1 /p min ).

By the same argument applied to πref , | log πref (y′) − log πref (y)| ≤ 2 log(1 /p min ). The preference term is bounded by 1

β PR(y ≻ y′′ ) − P R(y′ ≻ y′′ ) ≤ 2Mβ .

Adding these contributions, however, would double-count: r contains the π-dependent log-ratio a(π; z) once and the π-independent terms once. The triangle inequality gives 

|r(π; z)| ≤ | a(π; z)| + |c(z)| ≤ 2 log(1 /p min ) + 2 log(1 /p min ) + 2Mβ ≤ D, 

with D := 4 log(1 /p min ) + 2 M/β . (We absorb the factor of two into D rather than the Lipschitz constant for cleanliness; the precise form of D is unimportant for the qualitative result.) 

Step 2: Lipschitzness of a(π; z) in π. Fix z = ( y, y ′, y ′′ ) and consider π, π ′ in the admissible set. It is immediate that 

a(π; z) − a(π′; z) =  log π(y) − log π′(y) −  log π(y′) − log π′(y′).

The function t 7 → log t is 1 /p min -Lipschitz on [ pmin , 1], since its derivative 1 /t is bounded by 1 /p min on this interval. Therefore, for any single coordinate u ∈ { y, y ′}, we have 

| log π(u) − log π′(u)| ≤ 1

pmin 

|π(u) − π′(u)| ≤ 1

pmin 

∥π − π′∥∞.

Applying the triangle inequality it is immediate that 

|a(π; z) − a(π′; z)| ≤ 2

pmin 

∥π − π′∥∞.

Since ∥π − π′∥∞ ≤ ∥ π − π′∥1 = 2 ∥π − π′∥TV , this yields 

|a(π; z) − a(π′; z)| ≤ 4

pmin 

∥π − π′∥TV .

Since c(z) does not depend on π, we obtain the same Lipschitz continuity bound for r—indeed, we have 

|r(π; z) − r(π′; z)| ≤ 4

pmin 

∥π − π′∥TV . (163) 

Step 3: Lipschitzness of LR 

> IPO

= r2. For any reals u, v with |u|, |v| ≤ D, it is immediate that 

|u2 − v2| = |u + v| · | u − v| ≤ 2D |u − v|.

Applying this to u = r(π; z) and v = r(π′; z), both bounded in absolute value by D from Step 1, we have that 

|L R

> IPO

(π; z) − L R

> IPO

(π′; z)| = |r(π; z)2 − r(π′; z)2| ≤ 2D |r(π; z) − r(π′; z)|.

Combining this bound with (163) yields 

|L R

> IPO

(π; z) − L R

> IPO

(π′; z)| ≤ 2D · 4

pmin 

∥π − π′∥TV = 8Dpmin 

∥π − π′∥TV .

Setting LLR 

> IPO

:= 8 D/p min completes the proof. 97 J.3 Algorithmic Stability Generalization Bounds in Expectation 

We now convert the algorithmic stability of Theorem 17 into a generalization guarantee under the risk-adjusted IPO loss. The argument requires two ingredients beyond stability: a bounded admissible policy class on which the IPO loss is Lipschitz, and a Lipschitzness lemma for the loss itself. We state these in turn before the main theorem. 

Assumption 5 (Bounded admissible policy class) . There exists a class Π ⊆ ∆( Y) such that: 

i. π⋆S ∈ Π almost surely for S ∼ D n, and πref ∈ Π; 

ii. there exists LLR 

> IPO

< ∞ such that for all π, π ′ ∈ Π and all comparison examples z = ( y, y ′, y ′′ ), 

|L R

> IPO

(π; z) − L R

> IPO

(π′; z)| ≤ LLR 

> IPO

∥π − π′∥TV ;

iii. there exists B < ∞ such that LR

> IPO

(π; z) ≤ B for all π ∈ Π and all z.

Remark 3 (Sufficient conditions) . Assumption 5 is satisfied whenever the admissible policies are bounded away from zero, i.e. π(y) ≥ pmin for all y and all π ∈ Π, and the risk-adjusted preferences satisfy |P R(y ≻

y′′ )| ≤ M . In that case LLR 

> IPO

= 8 D/p min and B = D2, with D := 4 log(1 /p min ) + 2 M/β , by Lemma 20. Such a uniform pmin exists, for example, on any bounded set in θ-space, which is in turn implied by the RQRE optimality condition β(θ − θref ) = PRπθ together with boundedness of PR (see Lemma 19). 

Theorem 18 (Stability-based generalization of risk-adjusted equilibrium) . Suppose the assumptions of The-orem 17 hold, together with Assumption 5. Let μmin  

> R

be a uniform lower bound on the strong-monotonicity modulus over the support of Dn, and let ζ be the preference-model stability constant of Assumption 3. Then the risk-adjusted equilibrium policy π⋆S satisfies 

ES

LR

> IPO

(π⋆S ) − bLR

> IPO

(π⋆S ) ≤ βn, βn := LLR 

> IPO

·

p|Y| ζ

√2 μmin 

> R

.

In particular, with ζ = O(1 /n ) for a stable preference-model fitter, the expected IPO generalization gap is 

O(1 /n ); with ζ = O(n−1/2), it is O(n−1/2). 

Proof. The argument proceeds in three steps: ( i) establish uniform stability of the map S 7 → π⋆S with respect to the IPO loss, ( ii ) apply the replace-one symmetrization identity, and ( iii ) bound the resulting expectation. 

Step 1: Uniform stability with respect to LR

> IPO

. Let 

S = ( z1, . . . , z n) and S(i) = ( z1, . . . , z i−1, z ′

> i

, z i+1 , . . . , z n)denote two samples differing only in their i-th element. By Theorem 17, we have the upper bound KL  π⋆S π⋆S(i)

 ≤ ζ2 · |Y| 

(μmin  

> R

)2 ,

where the factor |Y| converts the ∥ · ∥ ∞ bound on preference operators (Assumption 3) to the operator norm appearing in Theorem 5, via ∥P ∥op ≤ p|Y| ∥ P ∥∞. Pinsker’s inequality then gives 

∥π⋆S − π⋆S(i) ∥TV ≤

q 12 KL( π⋆S ∥ π⋆S(i) ) ≤

p|Y| ζ

√2 μmin 

> R

.

By Assumption 5(ii), for any comparison example z, we have the bound 

LR

> IPO

(π⋆S ; z) − L R

> IPO

(π⋆S(i) ; z) ≤ LLR 

> IPO

·

p|Y| ζ

√2 μmin 

> R

= βn. (164) This is uniform stability of the RQRE map with parameter βn.98 Step 2: Replace-one symmetrization. Let S = ( z1, . . . , z n) and eS = ( ez1, . . . , ezn) be two indepen-dent i.i.d. samples from Dn, and for each i ∈ { 1, . . . , n } define S(i) := ( z1, . . . , z i−1, ezi, z i+1 , . . . , z n). The population and empirical risks satisfy 

ES

LR

> IPO

(π⋆S ) = ES, ez

LR

> IPO

(π⋆S ; ez), ES

 bLR

> IPO

(π⋆S ) = 1

n

> n

X

> i=1

ES

LR

> IPO

(π⋆S ; zi).

Since ez in the first expression is i.i.d. from D and independent of S, we may rename it ezi for any i without changing the expectation—that is, 

ES

LR

> IPO

(π⋆S ) = 1

n

> n

X

> i=1

E

> S, ezi

LR

> IPO

(π⋆S ; ezi).

The pair ( S, ezi) has the same joint distribution as ( S(i), z i)—i.e., both consist of n + 1 i.i.d. draws with one designated as the “held-out” point—so by relabeling, 

ES, ezi

LR

> IPO

(π⋆S ; ezi) = ES, ezi

LR

> IPO

(π⋆S(i) ; zi).

Combining these observations yields 

ES

LR

> IPO

(π⋆S ) − bLR

> IPO

(π⋆S ) = 1

n

> n

X

> i=1

ES, ezi

LR

> IPO

(π⋆S(i) ; zi) − L R

> IPO

(π⋆S ; zi). (165) 

Step 3: Apply uniform stability. The samples S and S(i) differ only in their i-th coordinate ( zi vs. ezi), so by (164) evaluated on z = zi, we have that 

LR

> IPO

(π⋆S(i) ; zi) − L R

> IPO

(π⋆S ; zi) ≤ βn a.s. Taking expectations and applying the triangle inequality to (165) yields 

ES

LR

> IPO

(π⋆S ) − bLR

> IPO

(π⋆S ) ≤ 1

n

> n

X

> i=1

ES, ezi LR

> IPO

(π⋆S(i) ; zi) − L R

> IPO

(π⋆S ; zi) ≤ βn.

Remark 4 (Explicit constants in the IPO loss bounds) . Under the boundedness assumption |P R| ≤ M and diam( θref ) ≤ Dref , Lemma 19 gives 

pmin = e−(Dref +2 M/β )

|Y| .

Substituting this into Lemma 20 yields 

LLR 

> IPO

= 8Dpmin 

= 8 D |Y| eDref +2 M/β , where B = D2,

and D = 4 log(1 /p min ) + 2 M/β = 4  log |Y| + Dref + 2 M/β  + 2 M/β . The dependence on β is exponential through the factor e2M/β , which is unsurprising: small regularization β → 0 allows the RQRE policy to concentrate arbitrarily, blowing up the log-ratio in the IPO loss. The dependence on |Y| is linear through the explicit factor and logarithmic through D.

## J.4 Algorithmic Stability High Probability Generalization Bounds 

Theorem 18 bounds the generalization gap in expectation. For a high-probability bound, the standard route is to view Φ( S) := LR

> IPO

(π⋆S )− bLR

> IPO

(π⋆S ) as a function of the i.i.d. sample S and apply a concentration inequality exploiting bounded differences. The classical Bousquet and Elisseeff (2002) approach uses McDiarmid’s inequality, with the difference constant inherited from uniform stability: |Φ( S) − Φ( S(i))| ≤ 2βn + B/n . This is informative only when βn = O(1 /n ), which in our setting requires the preference-model stability constant 

ζ from Assumption 3 to scale as ζ = O(1 /n ). 99 This fast-stability regime is unrealistic in our setting. The ζ = O(1 /n ) rate is characteristic of preference fitters that are themselves uniformly stable algorithms—for instance, ERM with a strongly convex regularizer. Although the risk-adjusted equilibrium objective itself is KL-regularized at strength β, that regularization controls how the optimal policy θ⋆ responds to a given preference operator, not how the preference operator 

PR,S depends on the training sample. These two stabilities are decoupled: β governs the operator-to-policy map (the 1 /μ R constant of Theorem 5), while ζ governs the sample-to-operator map, which is a property of the preference fitter itself. In typical modern RLHF pipelines, where the preference model is a deep network trained by SGD on a Bradley–Terry-style objective, the best one can generically argue is the concentration rate ζ = O(n−1/2). Moreover, even if a fast regime were attainable in principle, the explicit constants of Remark 4 scale as e2M/β , so one cannot tune β to reach the fast regime without paying an exponential price in the loss-Lipschitz constant. The slow-stability regime ζ = O(n−1/2) is therefore the one that matters in practice, and McDiarmid’s inequality is inadequate there: the term nβ n

plog(1 /δ )/n becomes O(1) and the bound carries no informa-tion. Fortunately, the gap between the in-expectation and high-probability rates can be closed using the sharper concentration of Bousquet et al. (2020), which exploits the weak correlation between coordinate-wise perturbations of a uniformly stable algorithm. Their bound replaces the prohibitive nβ n factor by 

βn log n, yielding a high-probability rate that matches the in-expectation rate up to logarithmic factors in both regimes. We state the resulting corollary below. 

Corollary 14 (Sharp high-probability generalization bound) . Under the assumptions of Theorem 18, there exists a universal constant c > 0 such that for any δ ∈ (0 , 1), with probability at least 1 − δ over the draw of S ∼ D n, the estimate holds: 

LR

> IPO

(π⋆S ) − bLR

> IPO

(π⋆S ) ≤ c βn log n log 1

δ + B

r log(1 /δ )

n

!

, (166) where βn = LLR

> IPO

p|Y| ζ/ (√2 μmin  

> R

) is the uniform stability parameter from Theorem 18 and B is the uniform bound on LR 

> IPO

from Assumption 5(iii). 

Proof. Define, for each i ∈ { 1, . . . , n }, the expected loss gap 

gi(z1, . . . , z n) := E

> ezi

h

E

> z

LR

> IPO

(π⋆S(i) ; z) − L R

> IPO

(π⋆S(i) ; zi)

i

,

where S(i) = ( z1, . . . , z i−1, ezi, z i+1 , . . . , z n) is S with its i-th coordinate replaced by an independent copy 

ezi, and the inner expectation is over a fresh z ∼ D . We verify that the gi satisfy the three conditions of Theorem 4 of Bousquet et al. (2020): 

i. Conditional bound | E[gi | zi]| ≤ M . By Assumption 5(iii), LR 

> IPO

≤ B uniformly, so the inner difference is bounded in absolute value by B, and any expectation thereof is at most B in absolute value. Thus 

| E[gi | zi]| ≤ B, so we set M := B.

ii. Centering E[gi | z[n]\{ i}] = 0 . Conditional on z[n]\{ i}, the inner expectation Eezi Ez [LR

> IPO

(π⋆S(i) ; z)] does not depend on zi (since zi has been replaced by ezi in S(i)). The second term, when averaged over zi,becomes Eezi,z i [LR

> IPO

(π⋆S(i) ; zi)]. Since zi and ezi are i.i.d. and the latter appears in S(i) in place of zi,by exchangeability this equals Eezi,z [LR

> IPO

(π⋆S(i) ; z)] where z ∼ D independently. The two terms cancel, giving E[gi | z[n]\{ i}] = 0. 

iii. Bounded differences in coordinates j̸ = i. Fix j̸ = i and consider modifying zj to z′ 

> j

. This changes S(i)

in coordinate j only. By the uniform stability bound (164), replacing one coordinate of the training set changes LR

> IPO

(π⋆S(i) ; z) by at most βn for any z. Therefore both terms inside the brackets change by at most βn, and gi changes by at most 2 βn. Thus gi has bounded differences with parameter β := 2 βn

in every coordinate j̸ = i.

Connecting P 

> i

gi to the generalization gap. By Lemma 7 of Bousquet et al. (2020), under uniform stability (164) and uniform boundedness LR 

> IPO

≤ B,

n LR

> IPO

(π⋆S ) − bLR

> IPO

(π⋆S ) ≤

> n

X

> i=1

gi + 2 nβ n a.s. 100 Applying the BKZ moment bound. By Theorem 4 of Bousquet et al. (2020), for any p ≥ 2, 

> n

X

> i=1

gi p

≤ 12 √2 p n β n⌈log 2 n⌉ + 4 B√pn. 

Lemma 1 of Bousquet et al. (2020) converts this moment bound into a tail bound: with probability at least 1 − δ, nX

> i=1

gi ≤ c1 n β n log n log 1

δ + c2 Bpn log(1 /δ )for absolute constants c1, c 2 > 0. Combining with the inequality above and dividing by n,

LR

> IPO

(π⋆S ) − bLR

> IPO

(π⋆S ) ≤ c1 βn log n log 1

δ + c2 B

r log(1 /δ )

n + 2 βn.

The final 2 βn term is dominated by the first term for n ≥ 2, δ ≤ 1, so absorbing all constants into a single 

c > 0 yields (166). 

# K Offline sample complexity 

In this section we establish a statistical guarantee for the risk-adjusted NLHF problem in the offline setting: given n iid preference comparisons, how close to the population risk-adjusted QRE π⋆ 

> R

can we get? The result is a fast eO(1 /n ) rate, generalizing the recent result of Zhang et al. (2026) for risk-neutral games. In their risk-neutral case the rate is governed by the KL temperature β; under risk, the rate is governed by the strong-monotonicity modulus μR = β − 2¯λR, and the constants pick up explicit dependence on the Lipschitz constant of the risk dual map and the leading bias coefficient. 

## K.1 Technical Novelties & Hurdles 

To better understand the contributions, we first outline the technical hurdles before diving in. 

Structural bias from risk. In the risk-neutral setting, the preference operator P satisfies the constant-sum identity P +P ⊤ = 11 ⊤, which yields a zero-sum game and enables a single-operator variational inequality formulation. Under risk, the induced operator PR is nonlinear in the opponent distribution, and in general 

PR1 (μ) + PR2 (μ)⊤̸ = 11 ⊤.

As a result, the game becomes general-sum , and the analysis must proceed via the joint pseudogradient rather than a single monotone operator. There is also a risk-distortion term that perturbs the monotonicity structure and must be controlled to retain strong monotonicity. 

Statistical bias from risk estimation. Unlike expectation, risk functionals are nonlinear, so Monte Carlo estimators are inherently biased. For plug-in estimators of the form bFR,m (θ) = h(bqm(θ)), where 

q(θ) = E[g(θ, Y ′′ )], the bias admits a delta-method expansion 

E[ bFR,m (θ)] − FR(θ) = h′′ (q(θ)) 2m Var( g(θ, Y ′′ )) + O(m−3/2).

This induces a persistent bias floor of order O(1 /m ) in the optimization error, which fundamentally limits achievable accuracy unless corrected. Our analysis explicitly tracks this bias through the extra-gradient dynamics. 101 Bernstein-type concentration for nonlinear risk. Controlling stochastic fluctuations of the risk es-timator requires new concentration arguments. Standard Hoeffding-type bounds are insufficient due to the nonlinear transformation h(·). Instead, we develop a Bernstein-style concentration bound that exploits vari-ance control of the inner statistic g(θ, Y ′′ ) together with smoothness of h. This yields high-probability bounds of the form 

∥ bFR,m (θ) − E[ bFR,m (θ)] ∥ ≲

r Var( g)

m + 1

m ,

uniformly over the iterates, which are crucial for obtaining sharp finite-sample rates. 

Connection to the rest of the paper. Theorem 7 is the offline analog of the online convergence guarantee for risk-adjusted extra-gradient (Proposition 1) and the two-timescale debiasing result (Theorem 15). All three rely on the same underlying object: the strong-monotonicity modulus μR = β − 2¯λR derived in Theorem 2. In the offline setting, μR governs the sample complexity rate. In the online setting, μR governs the convergence rate 1 − ημ R of EG iterates and the bias floor O(Bm/μ R). The condition ¯λR ≤ β/ 2 − ε is therefore the single technical assumption that delivers all three: fast convergence in iterations, vanishing bias floor under two-timescale debiasing, and fast statistical rate in offline samples. Conversely, the threshold ¯λR = β/ 2 is a fundamental boundary: it bounds the regime in which strong monotonicity holds, and we expect all three properties to fail simultaneously beyond it. This unified role of μR is the technical content of the “aligned risk reinforces regularization” message: when ∆ R ⪯ 0, μR is strengthened beyond β, and all three guarantees improve simultaneously—faster convergence, smaller bias floor, and faster statistical rate. 

## K.2 Preliminaries and main result 

Let ¯ π ∈ ∆( Y) be a fixed sampling distribution. We observe n iid samples {(yi, y ′

> i

, z i)}ni=1 , with ( yi, y ′

> i

) ∼ ¯π⊗ ¯π

and zi ∼ Bernoulli( P (yi, y ′

> i

)) where Py,y ′ = P(y ≻ y′) satisfies the constant-sum identity P + P ⊤ = 11 ⊤.We do not access the true P directly; only the n comparisons. For the entropic risk operator Rλ

> ent

, define the empirical risk-adjusted operator ( bPRμ)y := − 1

λ log 

X

> y′′

bμ(y′′ ) bg(y, y ′′ )

 , bg(y, y ′′ ) := 1

ny,y ′′ 

X

> i:( yi,y ′
> i)=( y,y ′′ )

exp( −λ z i),

where bμ = μ is the (known) opponent distribution, and ny,y ′′ = # {i : ( yi, y ′

> i

) = ( y, y ′′ )}.6

The empirical risk-adjusted QRE bπn is the unique fixed point of 

bθn = θref + bPR bπn

β , bπn = softmax( bθn).

The following is the sample complexity result from the main paper restated for convience. 

Theorem 7 (Offline sample complexity) . Consider the strongly monotone regime with μR = β − 2¯λR > 0, and the coherent risk measure admits the dual representation R[Z] = sup q∈Q Eμ[q(Y )Z(Y )], where Q is a convex, closed ambiguity set with uniformly bounded density ratios ∥q∥∞ ≤ MR. Let bπn be the empirical risk-adjusted equilibrium computed from n offline preference samples. With probability at least 1 − δ, the estimate holds: KL( π⋆

> R

∥bπn) ≲ M 2 

> R

log( |Y| /δ )/(μ2

> R

n).

A corollary to this result is the special case where R is entropy. 

Corollary 15 (Offline sample complexity, risk-adjusted NLHF) . Suppose ¯λR ≤ β/ 2 − ε for some ε > 0, so that μR := β − 2¯λR ≥ 2ε. Let bπn be the empirical RQRE defined above. For entropic risk R = Rλ 

> ent

with 

λ > 0, there is a constant K = K(λ) such that with probability at least 1 − δ,KL( π⋆

> R

∥bπn) ≤ K e 4λ log( |Y| /δ )

μ2 

> R

· n . (167)     

> 6We treat μas known to the learner; this matches the offline-NLHF setup where the learner chooses comparison pairs but does not know P.

102 The rate is eO(1 /n ), matching the risk-neutral rate of Zhang et al. (2026), with constants that capture the cost of risk: e4λ/μ 2

> R

. As ¯λR → β/ 2 the bound blows up, reflecting that the boundary of strong monotonicity is also the boundary of fast statistical learning. In the following subsections we construct both the proof of Theorem 7 and Corollary 15. They have the same components by and large. 

## K.3 Proof of Theorem 7 

The proof has three components, addressed in Sections K.3.1–K.3.3, then assembled in Section K.4. 

K.3.1 Component 1: bias of the plug-in operator 

We first quantify the deterministic bias. For coherent risk measures admitting the F¨ ollmer–Schied dual representation 

R[Z] = sup 

> q∈Q

E 

> μ

[q(Y )Z(Y )] ,

the empirical estimator replaces the expectation with a sample average: ( bPRμ)y = sup 

> q∈Q

1

n

> n

X

> i=1

q(Yi)zi.

For each fixed q, the estimator is unbiased: 

E

"

1

n

> n

X

> i=1

q(Yi)zi

#

= E[q(Y )Z(Y )] .

Thus, unlike the entropic case, there is no nonlinear transformation introducing a delta-method bias. The statistical error arises entirely from the supremum over q ∈ Q .

Lemma 21 (Maximization bias for coherent-risk plug-in estimator) . Fix y ∈ Y and μ ∈ ∆( Y). Let (PRμ)y = sup 

> q∈Q

Eμ[q(Y )Zy (Y )] , ( bPRμ)y = sup 

> q∈Q

1

n

> n

X

> i=1

q(Yi)Zy (Yi),

where Zy (Y ) = P (y ≻ Y ) and 0 ≤ q ≤ MR. Then 0 ≤ E[( bPRμ)y ] − (PRμ)y ≤ E sup 

> q∈Q

1

n

> n

X

> i=1

q(Yi)Zy (Yi) − Eμ[q(Y )Zy (Y )] .

In particular, if Q is finite, then 

E[( bPRμ)y ] − (PRμ)y ≤ CM R

r log |Q| 

n .

More generally, the right-hand side is bounded by the Rademacher complexity of the dual class 

Fy = {Y 7 → q(Y )Zy (Y ) : q ∈ Q} .

Proof. The lower bound follows from Jensen: 

E sup 

> q∈Q

bLn(q) ≥ sup 

> q∈Q

E bLn(q).

For the upper bound, 

E sup 

> q

bLn(q) − sup 

> q

L(q) ≤ E sup 

> q

 bLn(q) − L(q) ≤ E sup 

> q

|bLn(q) − L(q)|.

The finite-class bound follows from symmetrization and Massart’s lemma, using 0 ≤ q(Y )Zy (Y ) ≤ MR.103 For the entropic case, we have more structure. 

Lemma 22 (Plug-in bias for entropic risk) . For entropic risk Rλ 

> ent

and any μ supported on Y, the plug-in estimator bPRμ from n samples satisfies 

E[ bPRμ] − PRμ ∞ ≤ e2λ

2λ n min 

,

where nmin = min y,y ′′ #{i : ( yi, y ′

> i

) = ( y, y ′′ )}.

Proof. Fix any y, and write g(y, y ′′ ) := exp( −λP (y, y ′′ )) so that (PRμ)y = − 1 

> λ

log 

X

> y′′

μ(y′′ )g(y, y ′′ )

 .

The plug-in is the same expression with g(y, y ′′ ) replaced by bg(y, y ′′ ) = 1

> ny,y ′′

P 

> i

exp( −λz i). Note that 

E[bg(y, y ′′ )] = E[exp( −λz )] = (1 − Py,y ′′ ) + Py,y ′′ e−λ̸ = g(y, y ′′ ) in general. However, by the bias-correction identity for entropic risk (Hu and Hong, 2013, Lemma 3.2), the leading-order bias of the plug-in is exactly the delta-method term: 

E

− 1

λ log 

X

> y′′

μ(y′′ )bg(y, y ′′ )

 −

− 1

λ log 

X

> y′′

μ(y′′ ) E[bg(y, y ′′ )] 



= Var μ(bg(y, ·)) 2λ · Eμ[bg(y, ·)] 2 · ny,y ′′ 

+ R, 

where the residual R satisfies |R| ≤ e4λ/(λ n 2min ) by uniform boundedness of the third derivative of − 1 

> λ

log( ·)on [ e−λ, 1]. The leading term is bounded: Var μ(bg) ≤ 1, Eμ[bg] ≥ e−λ, so the leading term is at most e2λ/(2 λ n min ). The second sentence in the bias is similar. Combining, 

| E[( bPRμ)y ] − (PRμ)y | ≤ e2λ

2λ n min 

+ O(e4λ/n 2min ),

giving the claim once nmin is large. 

Remark 5. For sampling from ¯ π uniform with sample size n, nmin ≍ n/ |Y| 2 in expectation, so the per-entry bias becomes O(|Y| 2e2λ/(λn )). 

K.3.2 Component 2: concentration of the plug-in operator 

We now control the deviation of bPRμ from its mean. The crucial point: even though the plug-in is biased, it concentrates around its mean at a Bernstein-type rate. 

Lemma 23 (Concentration of plug-in entropic operator) . For each y ∈ Y , with probability at least 1 − δ,the estimate holds: 

( bPRμ)y − E[( bPRμ)y ] ≤ e2λ

λ

s

2 log(2 /δ )

nmin 

.

Further, by a union bound over y, with probability at least 1 − δ, the estimate holds: 

∥ bPRμ − E[ bPRμ]∥∞ ≤ e2λ

λ

s

2 log(2 |Y| /δ )

nmin 

.

104 Proof. Fix any y. Let h(bg) := − 1 

> λ

log( P 

> y′′

μ(y′′ )bg(y, y ′′ )). The function h is Lipschitz in bg on the domain 

bg ∈ [e−λ, 1] |Y| with Lipschitz constant 

Lh ≤ 1

λ · min y Eμ[bg(y, ·)] ≤ eλ

λ

since P 

> y′′

μ(y′′ )bg(y, y ′′ ) ≥ min y′′ bg(y, y ′′ ) ≥ e−λ. Each entry bg(y, y ′′ ) is an average of ny,y ′′ i.i.d. bounded random variables in [ e−λ, 1], with range 1 − e−λ ≤ 1. By H¨ oeffding, we have that Pr ( |bg(y, y ′′ ) − E bg(y, y ′′ )| ≥ t) ≤ 2e−2ny,y ′′ t2

.

By the union bound over y′′ and Lipschitz composition, we have that Pr ( |h(bg) − h(E bg)| ≥ Lh t) ≤ 2|Y| e−2nmin t2/|Y| 2

.

Setting t = |Y| plog(2 |Y| /δ )/(2 nmin ) and noting |h(bg) − h(E bg)| is close to (but not exactly) the deviation from the unbiased mean, we get the stated bound after absorbing the bias correction (Lemma 22) which contributes a lower-order O(1 /n min ) term. 

Remark 6 (Fast rate via Bernstein) . The above gives a eO(1 /√n) deviation bound, which is the standard concentration rate. To obtain the fast eO(1 /n ) rate of Theorem 7, we need a Bernstein-type bound that exploits the variance. This is the key technical step where the risk-adjusted setting departs from Zhang et al. (2026): their fast rate uses the skew-symmetric structure P + P ⊤ = 11 ⊤ to convert a eO(1 /√n) entrywise bound into a eO(1 /n ) bound on the equilibrium error. Under risk, the plug-in operator PR does not satisfy this antisymmetry. We recover the fast rate via a different route: Bernstein on the log-concentration of bg

(variance scales as E[bg(y, y ′′ )] 2 = O(e−2λ)), which gives 

|bg(y, y ′′ ) − E bg(y, y ′′ )| ≤ 

s

2Var( bg) log(1 /δ )

ny,y ′′ 

+ 2 log(1 /δ )3ny,y ′′ 

.

After the log-Lipschitz transform, this yields a deviation bound O(1 /√n) on bPR, but with a variance that scales as 1 /n , so by self-bounding the squared deviation contributes the eO(1 /n ) rate. See Lemma 24 below. 

Lemma 24 (Fast-rate concentration) . With probability at least 1 − δ, the estimate holds: 

∥ bPRμ − PRμ∥2 

> ∞

≤ C e 4λ log( |Y| /δ )

nmin 

for an absolute constant C.

Proof. Combine Lemmas 22 and 23 via ( a + b)2 ≤ 2a2 + 2 b2 to get that 

|( bPRμ)y − (PRμ)y |2 ≤ 2 |( bPRμ)y − E[( bPRμ)y ]|2 + 2 | E[( bPRμ)y ] − (PRμ)y |2

≤ 2e4λ 2 log(2 /δ )

λ2nmin 

+ 2e4λ

4λ2n2min 

.

Taking max over y and union-bounding gives the result with C = 4 + O(1 /n min ). 

Component 2, General Coherent Risk: concentration via dual Bernstein bounds Lemma 25 (Uniform Bernstein concentration) . Assume the dual set satisfies 0 ≤ q ≤ MR, Eμ q = 1. Then with probability at least 1 − δ, the bound holds: 

∥ bPRμ − PRμ∥∞ ≤ CM R

s

log( |Y| /δ )

nmin 

+ C′ log( |Y| /δ )

nmin 

.

105 Proof. Fix y and define Zi(q) := q(Yi)zi. Then ( bPRμ)y = sup 

> q∈Q

1

n

X

> i

Zi(q), (PRμ)y = sup 

> q∈Q

E Zi(q).

Since Zi(q) ∈ [0 , M R], Bernstein’s inequality gives 

1

n

X

> i

Zi(q) − E Zi(q) ≤

r 2Var( Z(q)) log(1 /δ )

n + 2MR log(1 /δ )3n .

Taking a union bound over y and standard supremum arguments yields the claim. The corresponding fast rate lemma for this case is given below. 

Lemma 26 (Fast-rate concentration) . With probability at least 1 − δ, the estimate holds: 

∥ bPRμ − PRμ∥2 

> ∞

≤ CM 2 

> R

log( |Y| /δ )

nmin 

.

K.3.3 Component 3: Stability of the risk-adjusted equilibrium 

We now establish that the risk adjusted equilibrium depends Lipschitz-continuously on the preference op-erator. The classical implicit function theorem would require analyzing the invertibility of ∇θ FR at the equilibrium, which depends on parameterization details. Instead we adopt the variational inequality frame-work (Dontchev and Rockafellar, 2009a; Rockafellar and Wets, 1998), within which strong monotonicity of 

FR directly yields global Lipschitz dependence of the solution on parameters. This is robust to constrained or non-smooth settings (e.g. simplex-constrained policies, trust-region clipping) where the classical implicit function theorem would not apply. 

VI formulation. The risk adjusted equilibrium θ⋆ for preference operator P is the unique zero of FR,P (θ) := 

β(θ − θref ) − PR πθ on 1⊥, equivalently the unique solution of the generalized equation 0 ∈ FR,P (θ) + N (θ) (168) with N ≡ { 0} in our softmax parameterization. Strong monotonicity of FR,P on 1⊥ with modulus μR

(Theorem 2) implies, via standard VI theory, that the solution mapping P 7 → θ⋆

> R

(P ) is single-valued and globally Lipschitz (Dontchev and Rockafellar, 2009a, Theorem 3F.4). We state the resulting bound in the form needed for our proof. 

Lemma 27 (Stability under operator perturbation) . Let P, P ′ be two preference operators with correspond-ing risk-adjusted operators PR, P ′R. Assume the strong-monotonicity condition ¯λR(P ), ¯λR(P ′) ≤ β/ 2 − ε for some ε > 0, and let μR := β − 2¯λR ≥ 2ε. Let π⋆, π ′⋆ be the corresponding risk-adjusted equilibrium. Then KL( π⋆∥π′⋆) ≤ 1

μ2

> R

PR − P ′R

> 2
> ∞

.

Proof. The argument has two steps: ( i) parameter-stability via strong monotonicity, and ( ii ) softmax–KL conversion. 

Step 1: Parameter stability via VI. By definition, FR,P (θ⋆) = 0 and FR,P ′ (θ′⋆) = 0. Subtracting and rearranging, with θ2 := θ′⋆, we have that 

FR,P (θ′⋆) − FR,P (θ⋆) = FR,P (θ′⋆)= FR,P (θ′⋆) − FR,P ′ (θ′⋆)= −(PR − P ′R) πθ′⋆ , (169) 106 where in the second line we added 0 = FR,P ′ (θ′⋆), and in the third we used that FR,P and FR,P ′ differ only in the operator term: FR,P (θ) − FR,P ′ (θ) = −(PR − P ′R)πθ .By strong monotonicity of FR,P (Theorem 2), the lower bound holds: 

FR,P (θ′⋆) − FR,P (θ⋆), θ ′⋆ − θ⋆ ≥ μR ∥θ′⋆ − θ⋆∥22. (170) Combining (169) with (170) and applying Cauchy–Schwarz on the right-hand side, we obtain 

μR ∥θ′⋆ − θ⋆∥22 ≤ (PR − P ′R) πθ′⋆ , θ ′⋆ − θ⋆

≤ ∥ (PR − P ′R) πθ′⋆ ∥2 · ∥ θ′⋆ − θ⋆∥2.

Dividing by ∥θ′⋆ − θ⋆∥2 (the bound is trivial if this is zero), we have that 

∥θ⋆ − θ′⋆∥2 ≤ 1

μR

∥(PR − P ′R) πθ′⋆ ∥2. (171) Bounding the right-hand side using πθ′⋆ ∈ ∆( Y), yields 

∥(PR − P ′R) πθ′⋆ ∥2 ≤ ∥ (PR − P ′R) πθ′⋆ ∥∞ · p|Y| ≤ ∥ PR − P ′R∥∞.

The last inequality uses ∥M π ∥∞ ≤ ∥ M ∥∞ · ∥ π∥1 = ∥M ∥∞ for π ∈ ∆( Y) (where ∥M ∥∞ := max y,y ′ |My,y ′ | is the entrywise max-norm), absorbing the factor p|Y| into the constant K in the main theorem. 7

Step 2: KL conversion. The map θ 7 → πθ = softmax( θ) is 1-Lipschitz from the Euclidean parameter norm to the KL divergence on the simplex on appropriate subspaces. Specifically, for any θ1, θ 2 ∈ R|Y| ,KL( πθ1 ∥πθ2 ) ≤ 12 ∥θ1 − θ2∥22. (172) This is the standard KL– ℓ2 bound for softmax-induced distributions: log P 

> y

eθy is 1-strongly convex in θ on 

1⊥, and (172) is the corresponding Bregman bound. 8

Combining (171) (with the bound by ∥PR − P ′R∥∞) and (172) gives KL( π⋆∥π′⋆) ≤ 12 ∥θ⋆ − θ′⋆∥22 ≤ 12μ2

> R

∥PR − P ′R∥2

> ∞

,

which is the claim with the constant absorbed into the leading K of the main theorem. 

Connection to strong metric regularity. Lemma 27 is a special case of the general strong metric regularity of solution mappings of strongly monotone variational inequalities (Dontchev and Rockafellar, 2009a, Theorem 3F.4): for the canonically perturbed generalized equation v ∈ FR,P (θ) + N (θ), the solution map v 7 → θv is single-valued and Lipschitz with constant 1 /μ R. Setting v = −(PR − P ′R)πθ′⋆ recovers (171). In our softmax parameterization N ≡ { 0}, but the framework extends without modification to constrained or projected dynamics where N (θ) is the normal cone of a feasibility set. 

Remark 7. This is the analog of Zhang et al. (2026, Lemma 3.2) adapted to the risk-adjusted setting. Their proof uses the skew-symmetric structure P + P ⊤ = 11 ⊤ to obtain a stronger metric (the KL-bound holds at level 1 /β rather than 1 /μ R, and they exploit a duality structure to get eO(1 /n ) from eO(1 /√n)entrywise concentration). Under risk this skew-symmetric structure is generically lost, so we need both the strong-monotonicity-based stability above and the Bernstein-type fast-rate concentration of Lemma 24. 

## K.4 Assembling the pieces 

We combine Lemma 22 (bias control), Lemma 24 (fast-rate concentration), and Lemma 27 (stability of the risk adjusted equilibrium) to obtain the main offline sample complexity bound. 

Proof of Corollary 15. By assumption, ¯λR(P ) ≤ β/ 2 − ε, so the population strong-monotonicity modulus is 

μR ≥ 2ε > 0. We need an analogous lower bound on the empirical ¯λR( bP ) to apply Lemma 27 to the pair (P, bP ).                                     

> 7The factor p|Y| is benign: it appears in the proof of Lemma 24 via the |Y| in the union bound, and our final theorem already absorbs |Y| into the logarithmic factor.
> 8Proof: KL( π1∥π2) = log Z2−log Z1+⟨θ1−θ2, π 1⟩where Zi=P
> ye(θi)y.By Taylor expansion of log Zaround θ1, the second-order term is bounded by 12∥θ1−θ2∥22since the Hessian of log Zis diag( π)−ππ ⊤⪯I.

107 Step 1: Empirical strong monotonicity. The risk-distortion eigenvalue ¯λR(P ) is Lipschitz in the entry-wise ∥·∥ ∞ norm of P . Specifically, for entropic risk R = Rλ

> ent

, the Jacobian JR(P, μ )y,y ′ = − 1 

> λe−λP y,y ′
> P
> y′′ μ(y′′ )e−λP y,y ′′

is composed of ratios of exponentials in P , and a direct computation gives the entrywise Lipschitz bound 

|JR(P ) − JR(P ′)|y,y ′ ≤ 2e2λ∥P − P ′∥∞, hence ∥JR(P ) − JR(P ′)∥2 ≤ 2|Y| e2λ∥P − P ′∥∞ in spectral norm. Combined with the 1-Lipschitz property of λmax on symmetric matrices (Weyl’s inequality), the bound holds: 

|¯λR(P ) − ¯λR(P ′)| ≤ cR ∥P − P ′∥∞, cR = 2 |Y| e2λ. (173) By Lemma 24, with probability at least 1 − δ/ 2, 

∥ bPR − PR∥∞ ≤

s

C1 e4λ log(2 |Y| /δ )

nmin 

.

For the empirical strong-monotonicity to hold with modulus at least μR/2, we need ∥ bPR − PR∥∞ ≤ ε/c R,which translates to 

nmin ≥ n0(ε, λ, |Y| , δ ) := 4C1 e8λ|Y| 2 log(2 |Y| /δ )

ε2 .

On the event {nmin ≥ n0}, we have ¯λR( bP ) ≤ β/ 2 − ε/ 2, the empirical risk-adjusted equilibrium bπn exists and is unique, and the modulus μR( bP ) ≥ ε ≥ μR/2. Lemma 27 therefore applies to the pair ( P, bP ) with shared modulus μ−R := min {μR(P ), μ R( bP )} ≥ μR/2. 

Step 2: Apply stability lemma. By Lemma 27 applied with P ′ = bP ,KL( π⋆

> R

∥bπn) ≤ 1(μ−R)2 ∥PR − bPR∥2

> ∞

.

Step 3: Apply concentration lemma. By Lemma 24, with probability at least 1 − δ/ 2, 

∥ bPR − PR∥2 

> ∞

≤ C1 e4λ log(2 |Y| /δ )

nmin 

.

Step 4: Combine via union bound. With probability at least 1 − δ (union over the events in Steps 1 and 3, which were each at level δ/ 2): KL( π⋆

> R

∥bπn) ≤ C1 e4λ log(2 |Y| /δ )(μ−R)2 · nmin 

. (174) Since μ−R ≥ ε ≥ μR/2 on the event of Step 1, and μR ≥ 2ε by assumption, we can replace μ−R in (174) by 

μR/2, picking up an extra factor of 4 that we absorb into the constant. 

Step 5: Convert from nmin to n. For uniform sampling ¯ π = Unif( Y), the per-pair count ny,y ′ is binomial with mean n/ |Y| 2. By a multiplicative Chernoff bound, with probability at least 1 − δ,

nmin ≥ n

2|Y| 2 whenever n ≥ 8|Y| 2 log( |Y| 2/δ ).

On this event, substituting into (174) and absorbing the resulting |Y| 2 into the constant gives KL( π⋆

> R

∥bπn) ≤ K e 4λ log( |Y| /δ )

μ2 

> R

· n ,

for an absolute constant K = K(¯ π) that depends on the chosen sampling distribution. This completes the proof. 108 Where the constant K comes from. Tracing through the argument, the constant has four contributions: 

• A factor of 1 /2 from the softmax-KL bound (172) in Step 2 of Lemma 27. 

• A factor of |Y| from the bound ∥(PR − P ′R)π∥2 ≤ p|Y| ∥ PR − P ′R∥∞ in Step 1 of Lemma 27. This p|Y| becomes |Y| in the parameter-norm-squared bound, which then enters the KL-bound through Pinsker. 

• A factor of |Y| 2 from nmin ≥ n/ (2 |Y| 2) for uniform sampling in Step 5 above. 

• A constant C1 from the Bernstein concentration of Lemma 24 that does not depend on |Y| , β, λ .The total polynomial dependence on |Y| in the rate is therefore |Y| 3. This can be reduced to |Y| 2 via importance-weighted sampling that equalizes pair counts, and potentially to |Y| via a row-wise concentration argument that bypasses the ℓ2-vs-ℓ∞ conversion in Lemma 27; we do not pursue these refinements here. 

Proof for the General Convex Risk Measure Setting (Theorem 7). The proof only swaps out two key lemmas: we use Lemma 21, Lemma 25, and Lemma 26 for the general convex risk measure setting. Consider the setting of Theorem 7. Suppose the risk measure admits the F¨ ollmer–Schied dual represen-tation 

R[Z] = sup 

> q∈Q

Eμ[q(Y )Z(Y )] ,

for some 0 ≤ q ≤ MR, and where Eμ q = 1. Then the conclusion of Theorem 7 continues to hold with the following replacements: 1. Operator definition. Replace the entropic operator by the dual-risk operator (PRμ)y = sup 

> q∈Q

Eμ[q(Y ′′ )P (y ≻ Y ′′ )] , ( bPRμ)y = sup 

> q∈Q

1

ny,y ′′ 

X

> i:( yi,y ′
> i)=( y,y ′′ )

q(Yi) zi.

2. Bias term. The plug-in bias term of Lemma 22 is removed (or is O(1 /n ) without the entropic exponential factor), since the estimator is linear in the data for each fixed q.3. Concentration. Lemma 24 is replaced by a Bernstein-type bound over the dual class: 

∥ bPRμ − PRμ∥2 

> ∞

≲ M 2 

> R

log( |Y| /δ )

nmin 

.

4. Constants in the rate. The entropic factor e4λ in (167) is replaced by M 2

> R

.Consequently, with probability at least 1 − δ, the estimate holds: KL( π⋆

> R

∥bπn) ≤ K M 2 

> R

log( |Y| /δ )

μ2 

> R

n ,

for a constant K depending on the sampling distribution. 

## K.5 Discussion 

Comparison to risk-neutral case. Specializing Theorem 7 to R = E (λ = 0): ¯λR = 0, μR = β, and the bias of the plug-in operator vanishes (the plug-in for E is unbiased). The rate becomes KL( π⋆∥bπn) ≤

K log( |Y| /δ )/(β2n), which matches Zhang et al. (2026) up to the 1 /β vs. 1 /β 2 exponent. 9 The depen-dence on |Y| enters through nmin (sampling pairs uniformly). Better sampling distributions can reduce this dependence.        

> 9Their rate is eO(1 /(βn )) rather than our eO(1 /(β2n)) in the limiting risk-neutral case. The gap of one factor of βcomes from the skew-symmetry exploitation in their Lemma 3.3, which we cannot use under risk. Closing this gap in the risk-adjusted setting is an open question; we conjecture it requires a more refined concentration argument exploiting the residual structure of PRafter subtracting the constant-sum part.

109 Cost of risk in the constants. The rate has constants 

e4λ

μ2

> R

.

The e4λ factor is the price of nonlinearity in the entropic plug-in: the variance of the plug-in operator grows exponentially in λ. The 1 /μ 2 

> R

factor reflects how risk-aversion weakens strong monotonicity — as ¯λR → β/ 2, the bound diverges. 

When does this still beat 1/√n? The fast 1 /n rate holds whenever ¯λR ≤ β/ 2 − ε for some fixed ε > 0. Below this threshold, monotonicity is lost and the bound degrades. In the regime β/ 2 < ¯λR < β (weak monotonicity but no strong monotonicity), one can still obtain a slow eO(1 /√n) rate via standard arguments (omitted). 

Generalization to other risks. The proof structure transports to any coherent R for which (a) the plug-in estimator has bias O(LR/n ) via the delta-method and (b) the dual map is Lipschitz with constant LR.For CVaR with Rockafellar–Uryasev parameterization, the plug-in is unbiased (no delta-method residual), so the rate becomes KL( π⋆

> R

∥bπn) ≤ C log( |Y| /δ )(1 − α)2μ2

> R

n

with the cost-of-risk factor 1 /(1 − α)2 replacing e4λ. For general distortion risks the constants depend on the modulus of the distortion function. 

## K.6 Analog for CVaR with Rockafellar–Uryasev parameterization 

For CVaR risk, the Rockafellar–Uryasev variational form provides an unbiased estimator of the risk-adjusted operator, removing the delta-method bias term that drives the e4λ constant for entropic risk. We sketch the resulting bound here. Recall the variational characterization CVaR α[Z] = inf 

> t∈R

n

t + 11 − α E(Z − t)+

o

, (175) which gives an unbiased plug-in estimator: for fixed t, the empirical average bUn(t) := t + 11−αn 

Pni=1 (Zi − t)+

satisfies E[ bUn(t)] = t + 11−α E[( Z − t)+] exactly. Optimizing t jointly with the policy in the IPO loss gives the risk-adjusted CVaR-IPO objective; the corresponding empirical operator bP RU  

> R

is unbiased ( E[ bP RU  

> R

μ] = 

P R 

> CVaR α

μ). 

Theorem 19 (Offline sample complexity, CVaR risk) . Suppose ¯λCVaR  

> α

≤ β/ 2 − ε for some ε > 0, with 

μCVaR  

> α

:= β − 2¯λCVaR  

> α

≥ 2ε. Let bπRU  

> n

be the empirical RQRE under the RU parameterization. With probability at least 1 − δ,KL  π⋆ 

> CVaR α

bπRU 

> n

 ≤ K log( |Y| /δ )(1 − α)2 (μCVaR  

> α

)2 · n , (176) for an absolute constant K.

Proof sketch. Three modifications to the proof of Corollary 15: 

(i) No bias. Lemma 22 is replaced by E[ bP RU  

> R

μ] = P R 

> CVaR α

μ exactly, on account of (175). The bias term in the KL-bound vanishes. 

(ii) Different concentration constants. In Lemma 24, the role of the function g(y, y ′′ ) = exp( −λP y,y ′′ ) ∈

[e−λ, 1] is played by the truncated function ( Py,y ′′ − t)+ ∈ [0 , 1]. This gives a Bernstein-type bound with constant 1 rather than e2λ, but with a divisor (1 − α)2 from the 1 /(1 − α) scaling in (175): 

bP RU  

> R

μ − P R 

> CVaR α

μ 2 

> ∞

≤ C2 log( |Y| /δ )(1 − α)2 nmin 

.

110 The infimum over t inside (175) is achieved at t⋆ = VaR α(Z), and the joint minimization of ( t, θ ) in the offline procedure is well-posed: we optimize t alongside θ with the same sample, and standard joint-empirical-process arguments give the stated rate. 

(iii) Stability lemma is unchanged. Lemma 27 applies verbatim with P R 

> CVaR α

in place of P R

> ent

, since the lemma uses only strong monotonicity of FR on 1⊥, not the specific form of the risk. Combining (i)–(iii) yields (176). 

Comparison with entropic. The CVaR-RU rate is cleaner than the entropic rate in two respects: (1) no exponential factor e4λ, and (2) no delta-method residual buried in the constant. The cost is the 1 /(1 − α)2

factor that diverges as α → 1 (the deep-tail regime). This reflects the fundamental difficulty of estimating extreme tails: the effective sample size for the worst-1 −α tail is n(1 −α), so the variance scales as 1 /(n(1 −α)), and the squared deviation as 1 /(n(1 − α)) 2 feeds through the stability lemma. 

Other risks. The proof structure transports to any coherent risk for which (a) the plug-in estimator (or a variational parameterization) gives unbiased or O(1 /n )-biased estimates of PRμ, and (b) the dual map is locally Lipschitz with explicit constant. Distortion risks of bounded variation fall in this class. For risks with heavier tails or non-Lipschitz dual maps (extreme value theoretic risks, expectiles at rare quantiles), the analysis becomes more delicate but the strong-monotonicity machinery of Lemma 27 remains the right framework. 

## K.7 Empirical strong monotonicity is itself a statistical event 

A subtlety that deserves explicit comment: Lemma 27 requires both P and P ′ to satisfy the strong-monotonicity condition ¯λR ≤ β/ 2 − ε. The population P does so by assumption. But when we apply the lemma with P ′ = bP (the empirical operator), we need to verify that bP also satisfies it — and this is itself a random event, not automatic. 

Why this matters. The risk-adjusted quantal response equilibrium bπn is well-defined only if FR, bP is strongly monotone on 1⊥ (otherwise the operator may have no zero, multiple zeros, or only a zero outside our parameterization domain). Sample noise in bPR can in principle push ¯λR( bP ) above β/ 2, breaking the regime. This is the offline analog of the issue faced in the online setting (Section [X]): the algorithm’s guarantees rely on the iterates staying in the strong-monotonicity basin. 

What saves us. The eigenvalue ¯λR(·) is Lipschitz in the operator (eq. (173), with explicit Lipschitz constant cR = 2 |Y| e2λ for entropic risk), so concentration of bPR around PR (Lemma 24) translates to concentration of ¯λR( bP ) around ¯λR(P ). 

Proposition 10 (Concentration of empirical strong-monotonicity modulus) . Under the assumptions of Theorem 7, with probability at least 1 − δ, the estimate holds: 

¯λR( bP ) − ¯λR(P ) ≤ cR

s

C1 e4λ log( |Y| /δ )

nmin 

,

and consequently μR( bP ) ≥ μR(P )/2 provided 

nmin ≥ n0(ε, λ, |Y| , δ ) = 4C1 e8λ|Y| 2 log( |Y| /δ )

ε2 .

Proof. Combining Lemma 24 (high-probability bound on ∥ bPR − PR∥∞) with the eigenvalue Lipschitz bound (173) gives the first claim. The second claim follows by setting the right-hand side equal to ε and solving for nmin .111 Why the threshold n0 has e8λ. The exponential factor in the threshold is the price of the eigenvalue Lipschitz bound: c2 

> R

= 4 |Y| 2e4λ, multiplied by the per-entry variance e4λ from the entropic plug-in, gives 

e8λ in the denominator of the threshold. This is a worst-case bound; in practice, the eigenvalue concentrates much faster than this conservative estimate suggests, and the threshold can likely be tightened by a direct concentration argument on ¯λR( bP ) without going through the operator’s ℓ∞ deviation. 

Conceptual takeaway. The strong-monotonicity assumption is robust to estimation noise; empirical strong-mono follows from population strong-mono with the same modulus (up to a constant factor) for 

n above an explicit threshold. This is structurally analogous to how strong convexity of an empirical risk follows from strong convexity of the population risk in standard learning theory: the regularity is inherited. In our setting the regularity is monotonicity, but the inheritance principle is the same. For practitioners, this means the strong-mono assumption is checkable a posteriori : compute ¯λR( bP ) on the empirical operator and check that it is bounded away from β/ 2 by the slack the bound predicts. If the empirical eigenvalue is close to β/ 2, the regime may be unstable and a smaller λ (less risk) or larger β (more KL regularization) should be considered. 

# L Additional Experimental Results and Details 

In this appendix, we include the experimental setup details and additional results. 

## L.1 Experimental Setup and Implementation Details 

Below we describe each of the critical components of the experimental setup. 

Base model and SFT. All policies are LoRA fine-tuned ( r=256, α=512, dropout 0 .1) from a common 

SFT checkpoint: Gemma-2 2B-IT supervised on Alpaca-cleaned. 

Preference dataset and judge. Training prompts and pairwise preferences come from PKU-SafeRLHF (Ji et al., 2024). The online preference judge is a PairJudge sequence classifier trained on a mixture of HH-style preferences and PKU-SafeRLHF safety labels. Harmfulness is scored by the PKU Beaver cost model (lower = safer), used at evaluation time only. 

Methods. We compare eight policies sharing the same SFT base, LoRA configuration ( r=256, α=512, dropout 0 .1), and judges: SFT (no preference fine-tuning); EGPO (Zhou et al., 2025) and OMD (K=8) (Ca-landriello et al., 2024b) as risk-neutral baselines; EG (K=8), an extragradient risk-neutral variant; OMD-Ent 

(τ =10) and OMD-CVaR (α=0 .25), which apply entropic and CVaR aggregation over the K=8 opponent sam-ples; gDRO ,a severity-prior-weighted ERM with fixed prior p ∝ (1 , 2, 4, 8) over PKU severity strata {safe, low, medium, high } and no adversarial tilt; and gDRO-CVaR ( α=0 .25), which applies CVaR aggregation across the same severity groups. All risk-trained methods use streaming EMA group losses (coefficient 0 .9), a linear annealing schedule for the risk parameter over the first 20% of training, and a stratified sampler enforcing a minimum of 4 examples per group per batch. 

Optimization. All NLHF methods share: 10 epochs, AdamW with learning rate 5 ×10 −7, weight decay 0.01, bf16 precision, effective batch size 64 (micro-batch size 8), and warm-up over 1000 steps. Only the loss aggregator and group sampler differ across methods. All policies are trained on a single NVIDIA L40S GPU. 

Evaluation. Each policy is evaluated via all-pairs cross-play against eight opponents: the SFT base, SFT 

at four temperatures (0 .1, 0 .5, 2 .0, 3 .0), and three off-the-shelf chat models (Qwen-1.5B, SmolLM2, Qwen-7B), generating 4 responses per (policy, prompt) pair. Held-out prompts are partitioned into four strata: 

Random (100 prompts, unstratified), Conflict (100 prompts where preference and safety labels conflict), 

Sev-3 (100 highest-severity unsafe prompts), and Sev-1 (136 mildest-severity unsafe prompts). Importantly, none of these strata appear in training. 112 Figure 8: Per-prompt win-rate cumulative distribution functions (CDFs) on the Random stratum (100 prompts, pooled over opponents). 

Figure 9: Per-prompt win-rate CDFs on the Conflict stratum (100 prompts where preference and safety labels disagree). 

Metrics. For each (policy, opponent, prompt) triple we compute three per-prompt win-rates: Preference WR (P [judge( y ≻ y′)] under the PairJudge), Safety WR (fraction of pairs where the policy response has lower Beaver cost), and Combined WR (policy wins iff preferred and safer; otherwise inconclusive). Summaries report the mean and CVaR 0.25 of the per-prompt combined win-rate distribution pooled over opponents, with bootstrap 95% CIs from 2000 resamples. 

## L.2 Win-Rate Distributions Across Strata 

Figures 8–11 show the empirical cumulative distribution function (CDF) of the per-prompt win-rate distri-bution for each policy, pooled over opponents, across all four evaluation strata. A curve lying to the right at a given quantile means the policy achieves that win-rate on a larger fraction of prompts. On the random stratum (Figure 8), the K=8 methods as a group sit substantially to the right of the single-sample baselines ( SFT , EGPO ) on the safety and combined panels. Within the K=8 group, risk-adjusted and risk-neutral methods are largely indistinguishable on this stratum—consistent with the theory, which predicts risk adjustment matters most under distributional differences rather than on easy, unstratified prompts. The separation within the K = 8 group becomes increasingly visible on the harder strata. On the Conflict stratum (Figure 9), OMD-Ent and OMD-CVaR begin to pull right of the K = 8 risk-neutral baselines in the safety and combined panels across the mid-range quantiles. This effect is most pronounced on Sev-3 113 Figure 10: Per-prompt win-rate CDFs on the Sev-3 stratum (100 highest-severity unsafe prompts). 

Figure 11: Per-prompt win-rate CDFs on the Sev-1 stratum (136 mildest-severity unsafe prompts). (Figure 10), where risk-adjusted methods clearly retain mass at higher win-rates while the K = 8 neutral baselines accumulate more low-win-rate prompts at the tail, precisely where the framework predicts the gain. The Sev-1 stratum (Figure 11) shows a similar pattern at smaller magnitude. Across all strata, the preference CDFs remain tightly clustered among all K = 8 methods, confirming that the distributional gains on safety and combined win-rate come at no cost to preference performance. To position our additional baselines, Figure 12 reproduces the Sev-3 CDFs with EG-Ent (τ =5) and 

Nash-MD added: EG-Ent tracks the OMD risk-adjusted curves closely, confirming the risk-aggregation gains transfer to the extragradient framework, while Nash-MD sits between the single-sample and K=8 baselines. 

## L.3 Tail Robustness Across Opponents 

Figure 14 reports the CVaR 0.25 /Mean ratio of the combined win-rate distribution for each policy, broken out by opponent. A ratio close to 1 indicates that a policy performs consistently across prompts while a low ratio indicates the policy wins often on average but fails on a non-trivial fraction of prompts. The risk-adjusted advantage is most visible against the harder opponents, namely low-temperature SFT 

variants ( T =0 .1, T =0 .5) and the off-the-shelf chat models (Qwen-1.5B, SmolLM2, Qwen-7B), where ratios sit in the 0 .4–0 .8 range and OMD-Ent and OMD-CVaR consistently lead the K=8 risk-neutral baselines. Against the easy high-temperature opponents ( T =2 .0, T =3 .0), all methods converge near 1 .0 as every policy wins on nearly every prompt, leaving no tail to improve. Figures 13 and 15 quantify this gap directly. Figure 13 reports the absolute tail drop in percentage points, defined as the gap between mean win-rate and each risk measure (entropic, CVaR 0.25 , CVaR 0.125 ). Absolute 114 Figure 12: Per-prompt win-rate CDFs on the Sev-3 stratum with EG-Ent (τ =5) and Nash-MD added to the comparison. drops are not directly comparable across policies, since methods with higher means have more room to fall: the largest absolute drops on safety and combined win-rate are in fact incurred by the K=8 risk-neutral methods ( OMD ,EG ) and gDRO ,which also achieve the highest means. The scale-free comparison is given by the Risk/Mean ratio in the bottom row of Figure 15, and there the ordering is unambiguous: SFT and EGPO 

are the worst on every metric, sitting well below all K=8 methods; among the K=8 group, OMD-Ent and 

OMD-CVaR achieve the highest ratios on preference and safety, with the risk-neutral K=8 baselines and gDRO 

in between. The top row of Figure 15 shows the same picture geometrically. Each policy’s risk-adjusted win-rate is plotted against its mean win-rate; points above the diagonal are impossible by definition, and points close to it are the most robust. SFT and EGPO sit far below the diagonal across all three metrics, while the risk-adjusted K=8 methods cluster closest to it. Together, Figures 14–15 say that single-sample methods win on easy prompts but collapse at the tail, whereas risk-adjusted K=8 training maintains tail performance proportional to the mean. Figures 16 and 17 verify that this picture is not specific to the Random stratum or to the original eight policies. On Sev-3, EG-Ent (τ =5) achieves a tail drop comparable to OMD-Ent and well below the K=8 risk-neutral baselines, while Nash-MD tracks the single-sample methods rather than the K=8 group. On the Conflict stratum, the same geometric ordering holds in the mean–vs–risk-adjusted scatter: SFT, EGPO ,and Nash-MD sit furthest from the diagonal, whereas EG-Ent joins OMD-Ent and OMD-CVaR in the upper-right cluster of robust policies. 

Figure 13: Tail drop in percentage points on the Random stratum, defined as the gap between mean win-rate and each risk measure across preference, safety, and combined win-rates. Smaller values indicate less degradation at the tail. 115 Figure 14: CVaR 0.25 /Mean ratio of the combined win-rate distribution per opponent on the Random stratum. Higher values indicate more consistent performance across prompts. Dashed line at 1 .0 denotes perfect consistency. 

Figure 15: Mean vs. risk-adjusted win-rate (top row) and Risk/Mean ratio (bottom row) on the Random stratum, across preference, safety, and combined metrics. Points closer to the diagonal in the top row and bars closer to 1 .0 in the bottom row indicate more robust policies. 

Figure 16: Tail drop on the Sev-3 stratum with EG-Ent (τ =5) and Nash-MD added. 116 Figure 17: Mean vs. risk-adjusted win-rate (top row) and Risk/Mean ratio (bottom row) on the Conflict 

stratum with EG-Ent (τ =5) and Nash-MD added. 

## L.4 Response Consistency & Variance 

Figure 18 reports the mean variance of win-rates across responses generated by each policy, averaged over prompts and opponents across all three metrics. Lower variance indicates the policy produces more consistent outputs across samples for the same prompt. SFT and EGPO exhibit substantially higher variance than all 

K=8 methods. Among the K=8 methods, the risk-adjusted variants produce the most consistent responses, with OMD-Ent achieving the lowest variance on both preference and safety and OMD-CVaR close behind. The 

K=8 risk-neutral baselines sit between the single-sample methods and the risk-adjusted ones. Multi-sample training reduces variance generally, but as shown in the cross-strata and per-opponent results, this alone does not translate to tail robustness. Risk adjustment reduces variance and maintains that reduction across opponents and data strata. The same ordering holds on the Sev-3 stratum (Figure 19), where adding EG-Ent (τ =5) and Nash-MD 

shows that EG-Ent matches the low-variance risk-adjusted OMD variants while Nash-MD tracks the single-sample methods. 

Figure 18: Mean variance of win-rates across responses, averaged over prompts and opponents. Lower values indicate more consistent policy outputs. 117 Figure 19: Mean variance of win-rates across responses on the Sev-3 stratum with EG-Ent (τ =5) and 

Nash-MD added. 

## L.5 Cross-Play Win Rates Across Strata 

Figures 20–22 report the full cross-play win-rate heatmaps for the Conflict, Sev-3, and Sev-1 strata, comple-menting the Random stratum heatmap in Figure 4 of the main paper. Each cell reports the win-rate of the row policy against the column opponent. The broad pattern from the random stratum persists across all three strata: SFT and EGPO show substan-tially lower combined win-rates, particularly against the harder opponents, while all K=8 methods maintain strong performance. On the Conflict stratum (Figure 20), where preference and safety labels disagree, SFT 

and EGPO exhibit warm-colored cells on the combined panel against several opponents, reflecting their in-ability to simultaneously satisfy both criteria. The K=8 risk-adjusted methods, led by OMD-Ent , maintain consistently high combined win-rates across all opponents on this stratum. 

Figure 20: Cross-play win-rates on the Conflict stratum (100 prompts where preference and safety labels disagree), across preference, safety, and combined metrics. The Sev-3 stratum (Figure 21) shows the sharpest separation. All K=8 methods achieve very high preference win-rates, but the combined panel reveals meaningful differences: SFT and EGPO collapse on several opponents, with combined win-rates as low as 20–35%, while OMD-Ent achieves combined win-rates at or above 80% on every opponent, exceeding 95% against the easiest high-temperature SFT opponents. The Sev-1 stratum (Figure 22) follows a similar pattern at intermediate values, with OMD-Ent again leading consistently on the combined metric across all opponents. Figure 23 extends this picture with EG-Ent (τ =5) and Nash-MD: EG-Ent posts combined win-rates in line with the K=8 risk-adjusted OMD variants on every opponent, while Nash-MD’s combined cells track the single-sample baselines rather than the K=8 group, mirroring the pattern on the other strata. 118 Figure 21: Cross-play win-rates on the Sev-3 stratum (100 highest-severity unsafe prompts), across prefer-ence, safety, and combined metrics. 

Figure 22: Cross-play win-rates on the Sev-1 stratum (136 mildest-severity unsafe prompts), across prefer-ence, safety, and combined metrics. 

Figure 23: Cross-play win-rates on the Sev-3 stratum with EG-Ent (τ =5) and Nash-MD added. 119 L.6 Robustness Across Harm Categories 

Figures 24 and 25 report combined win-rate and robustness ratio broken down by harm category on the Random and Sev-3 strata respectively. The robustness ratio is CVaR 0.25 /Mean, with values closer to 1 indicating more consistent tail performance within that category. The left panels show that all K=8 methods achieve uniformly high combined win-rates across every harm category on both strata, with no single category standing out as a consistent failure mode. The right panels are more informative. On the Random stratum, across ten harm categories, SFT robustness ratios fall in the 0 .07- 0 .36 range and EGPO in the 0 .06–0 .66 range. The risk-adjusted methods achieve ratios of 0 .60 or above across most categories, a consistent improvement over the K=8 risk-neutral baselines. On the Sev-3 stratum, the same pattern holds across seventeen harm categories with smaller per-category prompt counts: 

SFT falls in the 0 .10–0 .32 range and EGPO in the 0 .26–0 .55 range, while risk-adjusted methods sit at 0 .64 or above across most categories. The improvement is uniform across harm types on both strata rather than concentrated in any particular category, supporting the generality of the risk adjustment mechanism. 

Figure 24: Combined win-rate (left) and CVaR 0.25 /Mean robustness ratio (right) broken down by harm category on the Random stratum. 

Figure 25: Combined win-rate (left) and CVaR 0.25 /Mean robustness ratio (right) broken down by harm category on the Sev-3 stratum. 120 L.7 Training Dynamics 

Figures 26 and 27 report training-time diagnostics — loss, reward accuracy, KL to the SFT reference, and gradient norm — across the full set of policies we trained, including parameter sweeps and additional families that are not reported in the cross-play evaluation: the entropic temperature sweep τ ∈ { 1, 2, 5, 10 } and CVaR sweep α ∈ { 0.125 , 0.25 , 0.50 } for OMD ,the analogous EG risk variants ( EG-Ent , EG-CVaR ), Nash-MD , and the 

gDRO family. All curves are clipped to the canonical 10-epoch horizon (4680 steps); faint lines are raw per-step values, bold lines are EMA-smoothed. Loss values are not directly comparable across families because each family minimizes a different objective (the IPO loss for OMD ,the extragradient loss for EG ,and the group-reweighted variants for gDRO), but within a family the loss tracks learning progress, and within OMD the entropic temperature τ orders the runs as expected, with τ =10 producing the steepest descent. KL drift rises steadily and is bounded for every method, with risk-adjusted OMD variants drifting slightly further than their risk-neutral counterparts and EG 

drifting less than OMD at matched risk parameters. Gradient norms remain in the ∼10–50 band throughout, with no evidence of explosion or collapse, and reward accuracy plateaus by ∼2000 steps with OMD-Ent 

variants edging the risk-neutral OMD (K=8) baseline. Together these diagnostics say that risk adjustment, opponent-sample aggregation, and group reweighting all train stably under our shared configuration: the evaluation differences in Sections L.2- L.6 arise from what the methods optimize, not from differences in how well they optimize it.  

> (a) Training loss for each model. (b) Reward accuracy over training.

Figure 26: Training loss and reward accuracy (fraction of training pairs on which the preferred response receives the higher implicit reward) across all OMD ,EG ,gDRO ,and Nash-MD variants. Faint lines are raw per-step values; bold lines are EMA-smoothed.  

> (a) KL divergence between the trained policy and the SFT
> reference.
> (b) Gradient norm over training.

Figure 27: KL drift to the SFT reference and gradient norm over training. 121 L.8 Risk-Sensitive IPO with Uncertainty over Safety Categories 

In this appendix section, we discuss the empirical implementation details for the group weighted RSPG. Let 

Z(π, π ′; ξ) = Pξ (y ≻ y′ | x) − τ log π(y | x)

μ(y | x) + τ log π′(y′ | x)

μ(y′ | x) ,

where ξ = ( x, a, e, ω, y, y ′) collects prompt, annotator, environment/subgroup, latent noise, and sampled responses, and μ is the reference policy. The nominal (risk-neutral) IPO population objective is 

L(π, π ′) = Eξ [Z(π, π ′; ξ)] .

Risk-sensitivity replaces the expectation with the entropic risk functional of parameter β:

Rβ [Z] = 1

β log Eξ

eβZ  = sup 

> q≪pξ



Eq [Z] − 1

β KL( q ∥ pξ )



. (177) The variational form in (177) makes the robustness interpretation explicit: the learner behaves as if the distribution over ξ were chosen by an adversary within a KL-ball around the nominal pξ , with ball radius controlled by 1 /β .Different choices of which component of ξ the adversary is allowed to reweight correspond to different robustness claims. We focus on risk taken over the safety category e.

L.8.1 What ”risk over group uncertainty” actually means here 

The variational identity 

Rβ [Z] = 1

β log Eξ

eβZ  = sup 

> q≪pξ



Eq [Z] − 1

β KL( q ∥ pξ )



.

says that entropic risk is DRO over a KL ball around the nominal. When you restrict the adversary to reweight only q(e), the KL collapses to KL( q(e)∥p(e)) and the ambiguity set is 

Qη = {q(e) | KL( q(e)∥p(e)) ≤ η}

with η implicit in β (Lagrangian form). So ”risk with respect to group uncertainty” means: the training-time marginal over safety categories p(e) is not trusted; deployment might see q(e)̸ = p(e) and the learner prepares for the worst such q within a KL ball. Concretely for PKU-SafeRLHF with 

e ∈ { safe , unsafe-low , unsafe-med , unsafe-high }

training data has some mix, say p = (0 .6, 0.2, 0.15 , 0.05). At deployment you might get q = (0 .3, 0.3, 0.2, 0.2)— i.e., more unsafe-high prompts than training. Risk-sensitive training asks: among plausible reweightings, which one makes me look worst, and can I minimize my loss against that? Importantly, risk sits on the outer expectation over e, not inside per-sample preferences. So this is risk over aleatoric category composition , not risk over, e.g., annotator noise or preference-model epistemic uncertainty. Those would be different choices of which coordinate of ξ the adversary reweights. 

L.8.2 Risk over the Safety Category ξ = e

Factor the nominal distribution as 

p(x, e, y, y ′) = p(e) p(x | e) π(y | x) π′(y′ | x),

and restrict the adversary in (177) to reweight only the marginal over e:

q(x, e, y, y ′) = q(e) p(x | e) π(y | x) π′(y′ | x).

122 Under this restriction, the KL divergence between joints collapses to a KL between marginals, KL( q ∥ p) = KL  q(e) ∥ p(e).

This encodes the statement: the category frequencies may be mis-specified at deployment, but within a category the prompt distribution, the policies, and the preference process behave as nominal .Define the category-conditional mean advantage 

Ze(π, π ′) := E Z(π, π ′; ξ) e = E 

> x|e

Ey∼π

> y′∼π′



P (y ≻ y′ | x) − τ log π(y | x)

μ(y | x) + τ log π′(y′ | x)

μ(y′ | x)



where here μ is the reference policy. The variational problem over q(e) then admits the closed form (Donsker– Varadhan for the discrete variable e): 

Leβ (π, π ′) = 1

β log X

> e

p(e) exp  β Z e(π, π ′), (178) with worst-case category distribution 

q⋆(e) ∝ p(e) exp  β Z e(π, π ′).

As β → 0, Leβ → Ee[Ze] (nominal). As β → ∞ , Leβ → max e Ze (worst category). 

L.8.3 Sign convention: robust vs. optimistic 

The sign of β determines whether the adversary hurts or helps the learner. Suppose Z is player 1’s payoff advantage (higher is better for player 1) and player 1 seeks robustness across safety categories, i.e., wants to perform well in the worst category. Then player 1 should maximize 

eLeβ (π, π ′) = − 1

β log X

> e

p(e) exp   − β Z e(π, π ′), β > 0,

which is a soft-min over categories. Gradient mass concentrates on the categories where player 1 is doing 

worst . This is the direction to use for DRO-style safety-category robustness; using (178) with + β would instead produce optimism over categories. 

L.8.4 Sample-Level Implementation 

Let {(xi, e i, y i, y ′

> i

)}Bi=1 be a batch, and let Be = {i : ei = e}. Compute per-category empirical advantages ˆZe = 1

|B e|

X

> i∈B e

Z(π, π ′; ξi),

and form the robust objective ˆLeβ = − 1

β log X

> e

ˆp(e) exp( −β ˆZe)

!

, (179) where ˆ p(e) is the nominal or empirical category frequency. The gradient is a category-reweighted IPO gradient, 

∇ ˆLeβ = X

> e

we(β) ∇ ˆZe, we(β) = ˆp(e) e−β ˆZe

P 

> e′

ˆp(e′) e−β ˆZe′

,

i.e., the usual IPO/NLHF gradient with per-category softmax-worst-case weights we. This is a one-line modification of the IPO training loop: group sample losses by e, compute we, and sum. 

Connection to group DRO. Equation (179) is exactly the group-DRO objective of Sagawa et al. (2020) with temperature β, and the variational form (177) is the KL-ball DRO justification Hashimoto et al. (2018). 123