Title: Causal Foundations of Collective Agency

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.00248v1

Published Time: Mon, 04 May 2026 00:25:56 GMT

Number of Pages: 31

Markdown Content:
> Proceedings of Machine Learning Research 323:1–31, 2026 5th Conference on Causal Learning and Reasoning

# Causal Foundations of Collective Agency 

Frederik Hytting Jørgensen FREDERIK .HYTTING @MATH .KU .DK 

Copenhagen Causality Lab and Pioneer Centre for AI, University of Copenhagen, Denmark 

Sebastian Weichwald SWEICHWALD @MATH .KU .DK 

Copenhagen Causality Lab and Pioneer Centre for AI, University of Copenhagen, Denmark 

Lewis Hammond LEWIS .HAMMOND @COOPERATIVEAI .ORG 

Cooperative AI Foundation, United Kingdom 

Editors: Bijan Mazaheri and Niels Richard Hansen 

Abstract 

A key challenge for the safety of advanced AI systems is the possibility that multiple simpler agents might inadvertently form a collective agent with capabilities and goals distinct from those of any individual. More generally, determining when a group of agents can be viewed as a unified collective agent is a foundational question in the study of interactions and incentives in both biological and artificial systems. We adopt a behavioral perspective in answering this question, ascribing collective agency to a group when viewing the group’s joint actions as rational and goal-directed successfully predicts its behavior. We formalize this perspective on collective agency using causal games (Hammond et al., 2023) – which are causal models of strategic, multi-agent interactions – and causal abstraction (Rubenstein et al., 2017; Beckers and Halpern, 2019) – which formalizes when a simple, high-level model faithfully captures a more complex, low-level model. We use this framework to solve a puzzle regarding multi-agent incentives in actor-critic models and to make quantitative assessments of the degree of collective agency exhibited by different voting mechanisms. Our framework aims to provide a foundation for theoretical and empirical work to understand, predict, and control emergent collective agents in multi-agent AI systems. 

Keywords: Collective Agency, Causal Abstraction, Causal Incentives, AI Safety 

1. Introduction 

When does it make sense to view a group of individual agents as a unified collective agent? While this question may seem rather subjective at first, there is an intuitive sense in which we might ascribe collective agency to, for example, a well-organized, efficient, and synchronized team, as opposed to a random assortment of individuals pursuing independent courses of action. This is despite the fact that such a team may not have a leader or hierarchical structure (such as a jazz ensemble improvising, or a school of fish avoiding a predator), and may not even have the same objectives as one another (such as a market of buyers and sellers, or pollinating insects and flowering plants). Indeed, humans often use notions of collective agency to understand the world (Roth, 2017; Schweikard and Schmid, 2021). For example, it is not uncommon for people to use language such as “country A wants X, which conflicts with the interests of country B” or “company C is   

> © 2026 F.H. Jørgensen, S. Weichwald & L. Hammond.
> arXiv:2605.00248v1 [cs.AI] 30 Apr 2026 JØRGENSEN WEICHWALD HAMMOND

pursuing a new strategy Y”. While statements like these are usually supposed to be approximations, they can still be helpful for understanding the world and making predictions about the future. Some have even gone so far as to argue that individual minds are composed of agentic subsystems (Nagel, 1971; Minsky, 1988), in which case there is no privileged level of abstraction on which to locate agency. How can we make sense of agency arising at various levels of abstraction? Far from being purely philosophical, this question has important implications for understanding and predicting collective behavior in multi-agent systems, and hence for ensuring the safety of networks of artificial agents. A key safety challenge here is the possibility that multiple simpler AI systems might inadvertently form a ‘super-agent’ with capabilities and goals distinct from any individual in the group (Drexler, 2019; Hammond et al., 2025). Compared to AI tools, the ability of artificial 

agents to make plans and take actions in pursuit of complex goals makes them not only more useful, but also more harmful if those goals are misaligned or their pursuit produces negative side effects (Chan et al., 2023). For example, competitive pressures may lead individually rational AI agents to rapidly exhaust collective resources (Piatti et al., 2024), or a group of agents might combine their harmless individual capabilities to override safeguards and execute a cyberattack (Jones et al., 2024). 

1.1. Example: Actor-Critic Agents 

As a simple example of a collective agent, consider the well-known family of reinforcement learning (RL) agents known as actor-critic (AC) algorithms (Konda and Tsitsiklis, 2000). An AC agent comprises a critic that attempts to quantify how well the actor is performing relative to an objective, and an actor that attempts to improve its strategy according to the critic’s judgment. A single-step decision problem featuring an AC algorithm is shown as a causal game (Hammond et al., 2023) in Figure 1. 

A S R

Q Y W

(a)

A S R

(b)Figure 1: (a) A causal game representing an AC algorithm. In a causal game, square nodes represent decisions, circular nodes represent chance variables, diamond nodes represent utilities, and edges represent causal dependencies. In this game, the actor chooses an action a, which leads to a new state s and in turn the (true) reward r.2 The critic, on the other hand, chooses a Q function q that takes as input the action a to produce a predicted reward y “ qpaq. The actor’s utility is given by y and the critic’s utility is given by the loss w “ ℓpy, r q where ℓ

is a loss function. (b) A causal influence diagram (a single-agent causal game) forming a valid abstraction of the causal game in panel (a) of Figure 1. In this game, the (collective) AC agent effectively acts so as to maximize the reward directly. Both figures are adapted from Kenton et al. (2023).        

> 2. Note that in this simple, single-step AC problem, we leave the (fixed) starting state as implicit, such that Yonly has A
> as a parent. While it is common for the reward function to be a function of the current state, action, and the new state,
> 2CAUSAL FOUNDATIONS OF COLLECTIVE AGENCY

Even though neither the actor nor the critic is maximizing for the reward, the overall system still intuitively seems to pursue this goal. In this work, we argue that this is precisely because there is a valid abstraction that faithfully represents the low-level causal game (Rubenstein et al., 2017; Beckers and Halpern, 2019; Beckers et al., 2020), and which corresponds to the overall agent (shown in panel (b) of Figure 1). While Kenton et al. (2023) also suggested that panel (b) of Figure 1 was a possible alternative model of the true AC dynamics in panel (a), they made no argument as to why. We solve this problem, providing a formal account of agency at different levels of abstraction. 

1.2. Related Work 

The question of when multiple individuals constitute a unified collective agent has long occupied philosophers, with foundational work establishing the importance of collective intentionality and shared intentions (Searle, 1990; Tuomela, 2006; Ludwig, 2007; List and Pettit, 2011; Pacherie, 2013; Bratman, 2014). While most of these prior works focus on a rich notion of collective agency, such as requiring the mental modeling of collaborators, we take a behavioral or ‘black-box’ approach, reducing the question of whether something is a collective agent to whether ascribing collective agency is predictive of the group’s behavior. Though these works provide conceptual foundations, they generally lack the formal machinery needed to rigorously identify collective agents. Recent work has made progress on defining individual agents using causal and decision-theoretic tools (Orseau et al., 2018; Kenton et al., 2023; MacDermott et al., 2024; Xu and Rivera, 2024; Abel et al., 2025; Everitt et al., 2025; Rajcic and Søgaard, 2025), but none formally consider collective agents. For multi-agent settings, Hammond et al. (2023) introduce causal games – a framework generalizing multi-agent influence diagrams (Koller and Milch, 2003) to higher levels of Pearl’s causal hierarchy (Pearl, 2009). Other game-theoretic approaches provide models of coalition formation (Ray, 2007; Elkind and Rothe, 2016) but do not address whether such coalitions constitute unified agents. The concept of causal abstraction (Rubenstein et al., 2017; Beckers and Halpern, 2019; Beckers et al., 2020) formalizes when a high-level causal model is a valid abstraction of a detailed low-level model, preserving causal relationships when variables are aggregated. However, existing causal abstraction work focuses on causal models without agents, requiring extension to multi-agent settings with strategic interactions. A discussion of further related work can be found in Section A. 

1.3. Contributions 

After reviewing the necessary background in Section 2, we first use causal games (Hammond et al., 2023) to define what we mean by an individual decision-making agent, according to a given notion of rationality (such as playing a best response), in Section 3. Then, in Section 4 we leverage the concept of causal abstraction to provide a principled account of when a set of ‘low-level’ agents can be usefully modeled as a single ‘high-level’ collective agent. Using these formal tools, we prove a proposition that rules out the emergence of non-trivial agency at higher levels of abstraction and analyze the emergence of collective agency in the actor-critic example (Section 1.1). We further illustrate this framework in Section 5 by empirically analyzing different voting mechanisms and the extent to which they transform the different voters into a collective agent. Section 6 concludes with a brief summary and an overview of directions for future work. Section H further discusses  

> including sufficient information within the new state leads to an equivalent formulation where the reward is simply a function of the variable S.
> 3

JØRGENSEN WEICHWALD HAMMOND 

potential applications of our framework to multi-agent reinforcement learning and large language model agents. 

2. Background 

Our notation and setup draw inspiration from Geiger et al. (2025). We begin with the notion of a signature, which describes a set of variables and the values they may take. 

Definition 1 A signature is a tuple Σ “ p X, pran pXiqq iPr dsq, where X is a tuple of variables 

pX1, . . . , X dq and pran pXiqq iPr ds is a tuple of ranges for each variable. 3

For any subset Y Ď X, we define ran pY q “ Ś  

> YPY

ran pY q. Formally, we assume that the variables have disjoint ranges. 4 Therefore, we may consider the elements of ran pY q as sets rather than tuples. This technical assumption allows us to identify settings of variables Y Ď X with sets 

y P ran pY q, which is useful for defining projections (Definition 2) and mechanized abstractions (Definition 14). 

Definition 2 Given two sets of variables Y , Z Ď X, and setting y P ran pY q, we define the 

projection ΠZ pyq “ y X p Ť 

> ZPZ

ran pZqq .

For example, consider a signature given by the real-valued variables X “ t X1, X 2u, i.e., where each has range txXi | x P Ru for i P 1, 2. Then ΠtX1upt 4X1 , 5X2 uq “ t 4X1 u and ΠtX1upt 5X2 uq “ ∅.

Definition 3 Given a signature Σ, a deterministic (cyclic) structural causal model ĂM over Σ is a set of functions tFX uXPX , where FX : ran pXzt Xuq Ñ ran pXq. By Sp ĂMq we denote the elements 

x P ran pXq – i.e. the solutions – that satisfy FX pxzΠX pxqq “ ΠX pxq for all X P X.

Notice that while deterministic structural causal models may be cyclic, we will assume that proba-bilistic causal models are acyclic (see Definition 5). 

Definition 4 A hard intervention in a deterministic SCM is a setting y of some subset of variables 

Y Ď X. By Sp ĂM; yq – the solutions in ĂM, given intervention y – we denote the set of values 

x P ran pXq such that FX pxzΠX pxqq “ ΠX pxq for X R Y and ΠX pxq “ ΠX pyq for X P Y .

A hard intervention corresponds to replacing the functions FX with z Þ Ñ ΠX pyq for X P Y , and the solutions Sp ĂM; yq correspond to the settings x of variables X that are solutions to this new system of equations. 

Definition 5 Given a signature Σ, a structural causal model (SCM) M over Σ is a tuple 

pp V , Eq, G, tFV uV PV , PpEqq ,

where 

‚ p V , Eq is a partition of the variables in Σ into noise variables E and object variables V .We assume that each object variable has a unique noise variable associated with it, that is, 

E “ t EV uV PV .              

> 3. We sometimes consider Xa set rather than a tuple. 4. The assumption of disjoint ranges can be made without loss of generality: we subscript every value with the variable name to ensure uniqueness, such that, for example, xXi‰xXjfor xPRand i‰j. If it is clear from the context which range a value belongs to, we may omit the subscript.

4CAUSAL FOUNDATIONS OF COLLECTIVE AGENCY 

‚ G is a directed acyclic graph over the object variables V .

‚ t FV uV PV is a set of structural assignments FV : ran pPA G 

> V

Y t EV uq Ñ ran pV q, where PA G

> V

denotes the parents of V in G.

‚ PpEq is a distribution on ran pEq. We assume that the variables tEV uV PV are jointly indepen-dent. An SCM M induces a unique distribution PMpV q over the object variables V such that V “

FV pPA V , EV q, in distribution, for every V P V . Since the noise variables are jointly independent, the induced distribution PMpV q is Markovian with respect to G (Peters et al., 2017, Prop. 6.31). 

In order to consider causal games in which the mechanisms (i.e. the structural functions and noise variables) governing an object variable can change if an agent selects a different strategy, it will be useful to define parameterized SCMs, which is a class of SCMs with functions that are indexed by parameters. 5

Definition 6 Given a signature Σ, a parameterized SCM MΘ over Σ is a tuple 

´

pV , Eq, G, tΘV uV PV , tFθV uV PV ,θ PΘV , PpEq

¯

where pV , Eq, G, and PpEq are as for an SCM (Definition 5), and 

‚ t ΘV uV PV is a set of parameter spaces, one for each object variable. 

‚ t FθV uV PV ,θ PΘV is a set of structural assignments FθV : ran pPA G 

> V

Y t EV uq Ñ ran pV q, which are indexed by variables V and parameters θV P ΘV .For a given setting θ “ t θV uV PV of the parameters θV P ΘV , a parameterized SCM induces an SCM Mθ.

We are now ready to provide a formal definition of mechanized structural causal models (Ham-mond et al., 2023), in which the parameters θV of each structural function (representing the causal mechanisms in the model) are explicitly represented and governed by a separate deterministic cyclic SCM. 6 We depart slightly from Hammond et al. (2023) by having the mechanisms being governed by functions rather than relations. 

Definition 7 A mechanized SCM mM is a tuple ( ĂM, MΘ) where 

‚ ĂM is a deterministic cyclic SCM with mechanism variables rV .

‚ MΘ is a parameterized SCM with object variables V .We refer to V as the object nodes and to rV as the mechanism nodes . We assume that there is a one to one correspondence between the mechanism variables rV and object variables V , and that MΘ’s parameter sets are ΘV “ ran p rV q for each V P V . Every solution s P Sp ĂMq induces an SCM Ms

with structural assignments tFΠ rV psq 

> V

| V P V u and distribution PspV q. By PSp ĂMqpV q we denote the set of distributions tPspV q | s P Sp ĂMqu .  

> 5. This restriction to parameterized functions – again departing from (Hammond et al., 2023) – is more natural for AI agents whose strategies are represented by parametric models such as a neural network. 6. Dawid (2002) provides an earlier example of mechanized SCMs, though he does not consider the mechanism nodes themselves as being governed by an SCM, rather each mechanism node is parentless.

5JØRGENSEN WEICHWALD HAMMOND 

To help the reader understand this formalism, we provide a worked out formalization of the ‘Battle of the Sexes’ game as a mechanized SCM in Section B. 

3. Agency 

We define utilities as functions of nodes (i.e. object variables) rather than nodes in the causal graph itself, highlighting the constitutive rather than causal relationship between utilities and object variables (Xia and Bareinboim, 2024). For example, we may have two different agents, who both care about the number of bicycles in the world, but one agent wants to maximize the number of bicycles in the world, while the other agent wants to minimize the number of bicycles in the world. In that case, it would be problematic to have two different utility nodes because there would be a logical rather than causal relationship between the two utility nodes, which would violate the assumption of independent causal mechanisms (Peters et al., 2017; Jørgensen et al., 2025). 

Definition 8 Given a mechanized SCM mM with object variables V , we define a utility function 

as a function U : ran pV q Ñ R.

While we technically allow that a utility function U may depend on several object variables U Ď V,we will usually consider utilities that depend on a single object variable U . Given a utility function, we may wonder if any object level variables can be viewed as optimizing it. For this purpose, we use rationality relations (Hammond et al., 2023), which describe how an agent would react in a given context if employing a certain conception of rationality and having a certain utility function. 

Definition 9 Given a mechanized SCM mM, a mechanism node rS P rV and a utility function 

U : ran pV q Ñ R, a rationality relation is a total relation R rS Ď ran p rV zt rSuq ˆ ran p rSq. If 

F rS prcq P R rS prcq 7 for every context rc P ran p rV zt rSuq , then we say that rS responds R-rationally to utility U.

Intuitively, R rS prcq specifies the set of policies an agent with decision node S employing rationality relation R rS could employ in context rc if having utility function U.

Definition 10 Given a mechanism node rS P rV and a utility function U : ran pV q Ñ R, we define the best response rationality relation RBR  

> rS

under utility U by the condition that 

rs P RBR  

> rS

prcq if and only if rs P arg max  

> rs1Pran prSq

Ers1,rcpUpV qq 

for every rc P ran p rV zt rSuq .

Best response rationality is the main rationality concept we consider. Sometimes, other rationality concepts, such as subgame perfection, may be more appropriate (Hammond et al., 2023). Different notions of rationality may be particularly relevant in the context of collective agency for AI agents, where agents may be interacting with copies of themselves or have access to each other’s parameters (Critch et al., 2022; Oesterheld et al., 2023). We leave a detailed investigation of various rationality relations for future work, but in Section C, we show that sometimes we do not have collective agency under best response rationality, while we do have it for other rationality concepts.             

> 7. By RrSprcqwe denote the set trsPran prSq | p rc,rsq P RrSu.
> 6

CAUSAL FOUNDATIONS OF COLLECTIVE AGENCY 

Below we operationalize agency as rational, goal-driven behavior. While we do not claim that this is all that there is to the philosophical concept of agency, we do believe that this provides a useful starting point for a formalization of agency that works across levels of abstraction. 

Definition 11 Given a mechanized SCM mM, we say a mechanism variable rS P rV is an ( R, U)-

agent if rS responds R-rationally to utility U.

Kenton et al. (2023) discuss assumptions that make it possible to identify which nodes correspond to best-response rational agents and which nodes enter into their utility functions. Notice that every object variable is an agent with respect to best response rationality and a constant utility function. This is related to a classical insight in inverse reinforcement learning (Ng et al., 2000; Skalse and Abate, 2024), namely that reward functions are not generally identifiable from behavior. Likewise, if we allow any utility function, then any mechanism variable can be viewed as an agent. While modeling something as an agent optimizing for a constant utility function does not make false predictions, it also does not make any non-vacuous predictions. 

Definition 12 We say that a mechanism variable rS P rV is a non-trivial ( R, U)-agent if it is an (R, U)-agent and there exist two settings rc, rc1 P ran p rV zt rSuq such that Prc,F rS prcqpS | PA S q ‰ 

Prc1,F rS prc1qpS | PA S q

4. Collective Agency 

4.1. Mechanized Abstractions 

In this section, we refer to objects related to the high-level model using superscripts *. Given a low-level mechanized SCM mM, and a corresponding high-level mechanized SCM mM˚, we need to specify which of the low-level object variables V correspond to which high-level object variables 

V ˚. We call this correspondence a variable alignment. 

Definition 13 Given two mechanized causal graphs mM and mM˚, a variable alignment is a mapping A : V ˚ Ñ PpV qzt ∅u such that AV ˚ 

> 1

X AV ˚ 

> 2

“ ∅ for any two variables V ˚ 

> 1

, V ˚ 

> 2

P V ˚

(where AV ˚ 

> 1

:“ ApV ˚ 

> 1

q). Given a variable alignment, we define A rV ˚ Ď rV as those mechanism nodes that correspond to the object variables in AV ˚ .

Given a variable alignment A, a set of functions tτV ˚ uV ˚PV ˚ , where τV ˚ : ran pAV ˚ q Ñ ran pV ˚q,induces a function τ : ran pV q Ñ ran pV ˚q given by τ pvq “ Ť   

> V˚PV˚

τV ˚ pΠAV ˚ pvqq . We call these functions value mappings . These functions determine how we translate values of low-level object variables to values of high-level object variables. In addition, we need to specify how we translate interventions on the low-level mechanisms variables to interventions on the high-level mechanisms variables. These intervention mappings are given by partial functions tω rV ˚ u rV ˚P rV ˚ ,where ω rV ˚ : ran pA rV ˚ q á ran p rV ˚q. By dom pω rV ˚ q, we denote the subset of ran pA rV ˚ q on which 

ω rV ˚ is defined. For a subset rY ˚ Ď rV ˚, we define dom pω rY ˚ q “ Ś    

> rV˚PrY˚

dom pω rV ˚ q. The set of intervention mappings naturally induces a partial function ω, from any setting of a subset of low-level collections Ť    

> rV˚PrY˚

A rV ˚ to a setting of rY ˚, in particular, given ry P dom pω rY ˚ q, ω maps to Ť    

> rV˚PrY˚

ω rV ˚ pΠA rV ˚ pryqq .

Definition 14 Assume that we have two mechanized causal models mM and mM˚. Let a node alignment A be given. We say that mM˚ is a mechanized abstraction of mM under value mappings 

7JØRGENSEN WEICHWALD HAMMOND 

tτV ˚ uV ˚PV ˚ (τV ˚ : ran pAV ˚ q Ñ ran pV ˚q), and intervention mappings tω rV ˚ u rV ˚P rV ˚ (ω rV ˚ :ran pA rV ˚ q á ran p rV ˚q), if 

PSp ĂM;ryqpτ pV qq “ PSp ĂM˚;ωpryqq pV ˚q, (1) 

for any subset rY ˚ Ď rV ˚, and intervention ry P dom pω rY ˚ q.

Notice that Definition 14 in particular requires observational consistency, that is, PSp ĂMqpτ pV qq “ 

PSp ĂM˚qpV ˚q, by considering the empty subset rY ˚ “ ∅.Analogously to Beckers and Halpern (2019), we define strong mechanized abstractions by adding the requirement that for any setting of a subset of high-level mechanisms, there exists a low-level intervention that implements it. 

Definition 15 We say that mM˚ is a strong mechanized abstraction of mM under tτV ˚ uV ˚PV ˚ and 

tω rV ˚ u rV ˚P rV ˚ if mM˚ is a mechanized abstraction of mM under tτV ˚ uV ˚PV ˚ and tω rV ˚ u rV ˚P rV ˚ ,and each ω rV ˚ is surjective onto ran p rV ˚q.

If the mechanism models ĂM and ĂM˚ have no edges, then the definition above is an extension of constructive abstractions (Beckers and Halpern, 2019) that includes soft interventions a (hard intervention on mechanism variables may correspond to a soft intervention on the object variables). Unlike previous work on abstractions of soft interventions (Massidda et al., 2023), we do not impose any restrictions on ω except that it is induced from intervention mappings on the variable alignment. We believe that any further restrictions on ω must derive from context-specific considerations rather than being part of the definition. There are several ways in which this definition can be extended to approximate abstractions (Beckers et al., 2020; Rischel and Weichwald, 2021) and we likewise believe that the appropriate generalization is context-dependent. In Section 5, we consider restrictions on ω and a notion of approximate abstraction based on mean squared error for a fixed distribution over low-level interventions. In other applications, it is likely appropriate to consider KL divergence as is done, for example, in Dyer et al. (2024). 

4.2. Ruling out emergence of non-trivial agency 

We may want to rule out the emergence of agency at higher levels of abstraction. In this section, we provide a first example of a theorem that rules out that a node is a high-level agent based on properties of the low level. We say that a mechanism node rS has an independent mechanism if there exists a setting rs P ran p rSq

such that F rS prcq “ rs for all rc P ran p rV zt rSuq .

Proposition 16 Let mechanized models mM and mM˚ be given. Assume that mM˚ is a strong mechanized abstraction of mM for some value mappings tτV ˚ uV ˚PV ˚ and intervention mappings 

tω rV ˚ u rV ˚P rV ˚ . Let rS˚ P rV ˚ be a high-level mechanism variable. Assume that (i) τPA S˚ is injective, and (ii) the mechanism nodes in A rS˚ have independent mechanisms. Then rS˚ is not a non-trivial agent in m M˚. [See Section E for the proof.] 

We think that having a more complete theory of the (non-)emergence of agency is an important direction for future work. 

8CAUSAL FOUNDATIONS OF COLLECTIVE AGENCY              

> mMrArSrR
> ASR
> QYW
> rQrYĂW
> mM˚
> rA˚rS˚rR˚
> A˚S˚R˚
> τ, ω

Figure 2: A graphical representation of a causal abstraction applied to mechanized SCMs represent-ing the AC example from Section 1.1 (see Section D for the explicit construction of the abstraction). On the left hand side, we have the low-level model mM. On the right, we have a high-level model m M˚, which is a valid abstraction of the low-level model under 

τ and ω. By examining the high-level model, we can see that A˚ is an RBR -rational agent with utility equal to the reward: Upv˚q “ ΠR˚ pv˚q.

4.3. Example: Actor-Critic Agents (Revisited) 

We revisit the one-step AC agent (as described in Kenton et al. (2023) and Section 1.1). Here the critic 

rQ is tasked with predicting the reward R for different actions that the actor rA may take. The action 

A taken by the actor rA affects the state, and in turn, the reward. Kenton et al. (2023) hypothesize that one can, at a more coarse-grained level, view this as a single-agent system. This in turn explains why the system intuitively has an incentive to manipulate the state S, even though if one applies the graphical criterion for single-agent graphs (Everitt et al., 2021), it suggests that neither rA nor rQ have an incentive to manipulate the state S. See Section D for details about how to formalize this setup in terms of mechanized SCMs. 

Proposition 17 In Figure 2 (see also Section D for details), mM˚ is a strong mechanized abstrac-tion of mM. Furthermore, rA˚ in the high-level model mM˚ is an pRBR , Uq-agent with utility equal to the reward Upv˚q “ ΠR˚ pv˚q. [See Section F for the proof.] 

Note that while the AC example ‘marginalizes’ out one of the agents (namely the critic), our framework allows for more general types of collective agency. For example, in the next section, we consider aggregating individuals into a single agent. 

5. Example: Using Collective Agency for Surrogate Modeling 

In this section we show an application of collective agency for surrogate modeling. Specifically, we investigate the degree to which it makes sense to model countries as collective agents under various voting mechanisms. Dyer et al. (2024) introduced the idea of using causal abstractions for interventionally consistent surrogate modeling. We build on this work by extending it to mechanized abstractions with agents. There are at least three potential benefits of using surrogate models with collective agents: 1) the low-level model is often a black box where new interventions cannot be 

> 9

JØRGENSEN WEICHWALD HAMMOND      

> rv1,1
> v1,1
> rv1,2
> v1,2
> . . .
> . . .
> rv1,n
> v1,n
> q1rq1
> rv2,1
> v2,1
> rv2,2
> v2,2
> . . .
> . . .
> rv2,n
> v2,n
> q2rq2U
> rU
> Low-Level Country 1 Low-Level Country 2
> Global Interaction
> rq1
> q1
> rq2
> q2
> High-Level Country 1 High-Level Country 2
> U
> rUω
> ˆ˙
> τ, ω

Figure 3: At the low level, the global interaction includes edges between every pair of citizens and from the voting mechanism rq1 and rq2 to every citizen. At the high level, we view the countries as being individual agents, picking the pollution level in response to the other countries. Since we are intervening on the citizens preferences, we explicitly include a (vector valued) utility node rU . At the low level, it has dimension equal to the number of citizens. At the high level, it has dimension equal to the number of countries. In the figure and the main text, we omit superscripts (*) for the high level. simulated; 8 2) computing low-level equilibria may be computationally expensive, which hinders evaluations of new interventions; and 3) agency-based surrogate models may be useful for assessing abstract counterfactuals such as “how would country A react if country B adopts policy X?”. While we believe that there are practical applications where surrogate modeling with agents is useful, the main point of the example below is to provide a theoretical illustration and proof of concept. We therefore prioritize simplicity over realistic assumptions. 

5.1. The Low-Level Model 

We have C countries and each country c has Nc citizens. Each country employs a voting mechanism to determine the level of pollution qc. We assume that individual i from country c has utility 

Uci pqc, q ´cq “ aci qc ´ bci q2 

> c

´ dci Q2 

> W

,

8. This is essentially the point of discovering psychological regularities. It is much easier to predict people’s behavior based on abstract models of beliefs and preferences than based on neurophysiology (Dennett, 1989). 

10 CAUSAL FOUNDATIONS OF COLLECTIVE AGENCY 

where q´c are the pollution levels of countries other than c, aci , b ci , d ci P R are individual parameters, and QW “ ř 

> c

qc. We consider interventions on individuals’ preferences for pollution, for example, implemented by taxation or advocacy, such that aci is replaced with aci ´ λci ě 0.We assume that the result of the countries’ votes is a Nash equilibrium (NE) where every citizen of every country is a player. This NE may be computationally expensive to evaluate or, if the low-level model is not understood, can only be evaluated by playing it out in the physical world. Rather than reasoning about NEs containing every citizen of every country, it may be possible to model the situations at a higher level of abstraction where countries are modeled as agents. 

5.2. The High-Level Model 

We use a parametric model for country utilities, which mimics the utilities of individual agents: 

Ucpqc, q ´cq “ Acqc ´ Bcq2 

> c

´ DcQ2 

> W

. (2) Assuming that each country is an agent with this utility function, it is easy to derive that under NE, the total amount of pollution is 

QNE  

> W

“

> 12

ř

> c Ac
> Bc

1 ` ř

> c Dc
> Bc

,

and the individual contributions are 

qNE  

> c

“ Ac

2Bc

´ Dc

Bc

QNE  

> W

. (3) Notice that there is no guarantee that the voting mechanisms will produce pollution levels that are correctly modeled by the countries playing an NE according to a utility function parameterized by Equation (2). This is a modeling choice that may or may not be appropriate depending on the actual voting mechanism that is used and the utility functions of the individual citizens. 

5.3. Connecting the Low-Level and High-Level Models 

We want to learn a mapping ω from the vector intervention λ :“ p λci qci to an intervention on 

pAc, B c, D cqc such that the high-level model is a mechanized abstraction of the low-level model (see Figure 3). In other words, we want to see if we can view the countries as collective agents. Formally, 

ω ought to be such that 

PSp ĂM;λqpp qcqcq “ PSp ĂM˚;ωpλqq pp qcqcq

where we assume that solutions are given by best response rationality. In words, we want that applying intervention λ to the citizen preferences results in a low-level NE that equals the high-level NE under the ωpλq intervention in the high-level model. Notice that the high-level NE only depends on the parameters Ac,Bc, and Dc through the fractions 

αc :“ Ac 

> Bc

and δc :“ Dc 

> Bc

. A single sample is not enough to identify αc and δc (for each country, we have a single equation – Equation (3) – and two unknowns). Therefore we need to make assumptions about how our intervention affects the high-level utility function. For simplicity, we assume that the interventions only affect the αc’s and not the δc’s (which we know to be true for VCG voting; see   

> 11 JØRGENSEN WEICHWALD HAMMOND

Section G.1). Whether this assumption is reasonable for other voting mechanisms is an empirical question, which we explore in the results section. Using this assumption, we estimate ω using a two-step procedure. First, for each country c, we apply interventions such that λci “ 0 for all citizens i of country c, but non-zero for other countries. We then estimate δc by linear regression of qc on QW (which is justified by Equation (3)). Second, we parametrize ω : Rř  

> cNc

Ñ RC by the weights ϕ of a neural network and train the network to minimize the loss function Loss pϕq “ ÿ

> j

ÿ

> c

“pqNE  

> c

pϕpλj qq ´ qNE  

> c

pλj q‰2 ,

where λj is an intervention on the citizens preferences, qNE  

> c

pλj q is the resulting ground-truth low-level NE, and pqNE  

> c

pϕpλj qq is the NE derived by Equation (3) and the estimated pδc and xαc, the latter of which is one of the outputs returned by ω. The interventions λj are sampled according to a fixed distribution (see Section G.2 for details). Minimizing the consistency loss is the central idea of approximate causal abstractions (Beckers et al., 2020; Rischel and Weichwald, 2021). 

5.4. Results 

We consider three different voting mechanisms: Vickrey-Clarke-Groves (VCG), Median Voting, and Random Dictator. Descriptions of the three voting mechanisms and how we compute low-level Nash equilibria for each are given in Section G.1. We apply our method to a simulation with five countries and a total of 1,000 citizens. See Section G.2 for details about the simulations and training. We report a summary of the results in Table 1 and provide detailed results in Section G.3. Mechanism Model MAE Baseline MAE Improvement VCG 0.062 1.254 95.0% Median 0.142 1.248 88.6% Random Dictator 5.077 4.645 -9.3% Table 1: We are predicting qc for different voting mechanisms under interventions λ. (MAE) is mean absolute error for different voting mechanisms. The baseline is calculated by constantly predicting the low-level Nash equilibrium at λ “ 0 (since random dictator is stochastic we use the average low-level NE for this mechanism as the baseline). The errors are summed across all countries. VCG and Median voting show low errors (compared to the baseline), indicating that the collective agency framework effectively captures how interventions affect outcomes. Random Dictator performs worse than the baseline (-9.3%) and has large absolute errors, demonstrating the difficulty of learning an ω for this mechanism. 

6. Summary and future work 

In this work we have laid out a mathematical foundation of agency and collective agency based on the mathematical formalisms of mechanized causal graphs and causal abstraction. The framework opens up many interesting questions that we hope can be addressed in future work, including: 1) Investigating how different notions of rationality, such as different decision theories, affect the propensity for collective agency; 2) Developing a theory that predicts when collective agency    

> 12 CAUSAL FOUNDATIONS OF COLLECTIVE AGENCY

will emerge (see Proposition 16); 3) Extending inverse game theory or inverse reinforcement learning to various levels of abstraction; and 4) Translating our theory of collective agency into a mathematical framework that more naturally accommodates both non-independent mechanisms and causal abstractions, such as Garrabrant et al. (2024). We also hope that our work can help to provide the foundation for further theoretical and empirical work to understand, predict, and control emergent collective agents in networks of AI systems. 

7. Acknowledgments 

This work was initiated during FHJ’s participation in the Pivotal Research Fellowship. We thank Casper L ¨utzhøft Christensen, Soroush Ebadian, Sukanya Krishna, Francisco Madaleno, Kyle Reynoso, Morgan Simpson, and Riya Tyagi for helpful discussions and feedback. 

References 

David Abel, Andr ´e Barreto, Michael Bowling, Will Dabney, Shi Dong, Steven Hansen, Anna Harutyunyan, Khimya Khetarpal, Clare Lyle, Razvan Pascanu, et al. Agency is frame-dependent. 

arXiv , 2025. arXiv:2502.04403. (Cited on page 3.) 

P. W. Anderson. More is different: Broken symmetry and the nature of the hierarchical structure of science. Science , 177(4047):393–396, 1972. (Cited on page 18.) 

Sander Beckers and Joseph Y. Halpern. Abstracting causal models. In AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , 2019. (Cited on pages 1, 3, 8, and 19.) 

Sander Beckers, Frederick Eberhardt, and Joseph Y. Halpern. Approximate causal abstractions. In 

Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence , 2020. (Cited on pages 3, 8, 12, and 19.) 

Eric Bonabeau, Marco Dorigo, and Guy Theraulaz. Swarm Intelligence: From Natural to Artificial Systems . Oxford University Press, 1999. (Cited on page 19.) 

Michael E. Bratman. Shared Agency: A Planning Theory of Acting Together . Oxford University Press, 2014. (Cited on pages 3 and 18.) 

Alan Chan, Rebecca Salganik, Alva Markelius, Chris Pang, Nitarshan Rajkumar, Dmitrii Krashenin-nikov, Lauro Langosco, Zhonghao He, Yawen Duan, Micah Carroll, et al. Harms from increasingly agentic algorithmic systems. In Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency , 2023. 

> (Cited on pages 2 and 20.)

Chih-Chun Chen, Sylvia B. Nagl, and Christopher D. Clack. A formalism for multi-level emergent behaviours in designed component-based systems and agent-based simulations. In Moulay Aziz-Alaoui and Cyrille Bertelle, editors, From System Complexity to Emergent Properties , chapter 4, pages 101–114. Springer, 2009. (Cited on page 20.) 

Iain D. Couzin. Collective cognition in animal groups. Trends in Cognitive Sciences , 13(1):36–43, 2009. (Cited on page 19.) 13 JØRGENSEN WEICHWALD HAMMOND 

Andrew Critch, Michael Dennis, and Stuart Russell. Cooperative and uncooperative institution designs: Surprises and problems in open-source game theory. arXiv , 2022. arXiv:2208.07006. 

> (Cited on page 6.)

A Philip Dawid. Influence diagrams for causal modelling and inference. International Statistical Review , 2002. (Cited on page 5.) 

Daniel C Dennett. The intentional stance . MIT Press, 1989. (Cited on page 10.) 

K. Eric Drexler. Reframing superintelligence: Comprehensive AI services as general intelligence. Technical Report 2019-1, Future of Humanity Institute, University of Oxford, 2019. (Cited on pages 2 and 20.) 

Yilun Du, Shuang Li, Antonio Torralba, Joshua B. Tenenbaum, and Igor Mordatch. Improving factu-ality and reasoning in language models through multiagent debate. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2024. (Cited on page 30.) 

Joel Dyer, Nicholas George Bishop, Yorgos Felekis, Fabio Massimo Zennaro, Ani Calinescu, Theodoros Damoulas, and Michael J. Wooldridge. Interventionally consistent surrogates for complex simulation models. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2024. (Cited on pages 8 and 9.) 

Edith Elkind and J ¨org Rothe. Cooperative Game Theory , chapter 3, pages 135–193. Springer, 2016. 

> (Cited on pages 3 and 19.)

Tom Everitt, Ryan Carey, Eric D Langlois, Pedro A Ortega, and Shane Legg. Agent incentives: A causal perspective. In AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , 2021. (Cited on page 9.) 

Tom Everitt, Cristina Garbacea, Alexis Bellot, Jonathan Richens, Henry Papadatos, Sim ´eon Campos, and Rohin Shah. Evaluating the goal-directedness of large language models. arXiv , 2025. arXiv:2504.11844. (Cited on pages 3, 19, and 31.) 

Karl J Friston, Maxwell J D Ramstead, Alex B Kiefer, Alexander Tschantz, Christopher L Buckley, Mahault Albarracin, Riddhi J Pitliya, Conor Heins, Brennan Klein, Beren Millidge, Dalton A R Sakthivadivel, Toby St Clere Smithe, Magnus Koudahl, Safae Essafi Tremblay, Capm Petersen, Kaiser Fung, Jason G Fox, Steven Swanson, Dan Mapes, and Gabriel Ren ´e. Designing ecosystems of intelligence from first principles. Collective Intelligence, 3(1), 2024 , 3(1), 2022. (Cited on page 19.) 

Scott Garrabrant, Matthias Georg Mayer, Magdalena Wache, Leon Lang, Sam Eisenstat, and Holger Dell. Factored space models: Towards causality between levels of abstraction. arXiv , 2024. arXiv:2412.02579. (Cited on page 13.) 

Atticus Geiger, Duligur Ibeling, Amir Zur, Maheep Chaudhary, Sonakshi Chauhan, Jing Huang, Aryaman Arora, Zhengxuan Wu, Noah Goodman, Christopher Potts, et al. Causal abstraction: A theoretical foundation for mechanistic interpretability. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 26, 2025. (Cited on page 4.) 

Natalie Gold and Robert Sugden. Collective intentions and team agency. Journal of Philosophy , 104 (3):109–137, 2007. (Cited on page 18.) 14 CAUSAL FOUNDATIONS OF COLLECTIVE AGENCY 

Joseph Y. Halpern and Max Kleiman-Weiner. Towards formal definitions of blameworthiness, intention, and moral responsibility. In AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , 2018. (Cited on page 19.) 

Lewis Hammond, James Fox, Tom Everitt, Ryan Carey, Alessandro Abate, and Michael Wooldridge. Reasoning about causality in games. Artificial Intelligence , 320:103919, 2023. (Cited on pages 1, 2, 3, 5, 6, and 19.) 

Lewis Hammond, Alan Chan, Jesse Clifton, Jason Hoelscher-Obermaier, Akbir Khan, Euan McLean, Chandler Smith, Wolfram Barfuss, Jakob Foerster, Tom ´a ˇs Gaven ˇciak, The Anh Han, Edward Hughes, Vojt ˇech Kova ˇr´ık, Jan Kulveit, Joel Z. Leibo, Caspar Oesterheld, Christian Schroeder de Witt, Nisarg Shah, Michael Wellman, Paolo Bova, Theodor Cimpeanu, Carson Ezell, Quentin Feuillade-Montixi, Matija Franklin, Esben Kran, Igor Krawczuk, Max Lamparth, Niklas Lauffer, Alexander Meinke, Sumeet Motwani, Anka Reuel, Vincent Conitzer, Michael Dennis, Iason Gabriel, Adam Gleave, Gillian Hadfield, Nika Haghtalab, Atoosa Kasirzadeh, S ´ebastien Krier, Kate Larson, Joel Lehman, David C. Parkes, Georgios Piliouras, and Iyad Rahwan. Multi-agent risks from advanced AI. Technical Report 1, Cooperative AI Foundation, 2025. (Cited on pages 2 and 20.) 

Geoffrey Irving, Paul Christiano, and Dario Amodei. AI safety via debate. arXiv preprint arXiv:1805.00899 , 2018. (Cited on page 30.) 

Erik Jones, Anca Dragan, and Jacob Steinhardt. Adversaries can misuse combinations of safe models. 

arXiv , 2024. arXiv:2406.14595. (Cited on pages 2 and 20.) 

Frederik Hytting Jørgensen, Luigi Gresele, and Sebastian Weichwald. What is causal about causal models and representations? arXiv , 2025. arXiv:2501.19335. (Cited on pages 6 and 30.) 

Zachary Kenton, Ramana Kumar, Sebastian Farquhar, Jonathan Richens, Matt MacDermott, and Tom Everitt. Discovering agents. Artificial Intelligence , 2023. (Cited on pages 2, 3, 7, 9, 19, and 24.) 

Daphne Koller and Brian Milch. Multi-agent influence diagrams for representing and solving games. 

Games and Economic Behavior , 45(1):181–221, 2003. (Cited on pages 3 and 19.) 

Vijay R. Konda and John N. Tsitsiklis. Actor-critic algorithms. In S. A. Solla, T. K. Leen, and K. M ¨uller, editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , pages 1008–1014. MIT Press, 2000. (Cited on page 2.) 

Ale ˇs Kub ´ık. Toward a formalization of emergence. Artificial Life , 9(1):41–65, 2003. (Cited on page 19.) 

Hector J. Levesque, Philip R. Cohen, and Jos ´e H. T. Nunes. On acting together. In Proceedings of the 8th National Conference on Artificial Intelligence. Boston, Massachusetts, USA, July 29 -August 3, 1990, 2 Volumes , 1990. (Cited on page 19.) 

Qian Li et al. Towards scalable oversight with collaborative multi-agent debate in error detection. 

arXiv preprint , 2025. (Cited on page 30.) 

Christian List and Philip Pettit. Group Agency: The Possibility, Design, and Status of Corporate Agents . Oxford University Press, 2011. (Cited on pages 3 and 18.) 15 JØRGENSEN WEICHWALD HAMMOND 

Kirk Ludwig. Collective intentional behavior from the standpoint of semantics. No ˆus , 41(3):355–393, 2007. (Cited on pages 3 and 18.) 

Matt MacDermott, James Fox, Francesco Belardinelli, and Tom Everitt. Measuring goal-directedness. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2024. (Cited on pages 3 and 19.) 

Thomas W. Malone and Michael S. Bernstein. Handbook of Collective Intelligence . MIT Press, 2015. (Cited on page 18.) 

Riccardo Massidda, Atticus Geiger, Thomas Icard, and Davide Bacciu. Causal abstraction with soft interventions. In Causal Learning and Reasoning , 2023. (Cited on page 8.) 

Marvin Minsky. The Society of Mind . Simon and Schuster, 6. pb-pr. edition, 1988. (Cited on pages 2 and 18.) 

Melanie Mitchell. Complexity A Guided Tour . Oxford University Press, 2009. (Cited on page 18.) 

Thomas Nagel. Brain bisection and the unity of consciousness. Synthese , 22(3/4):396–413, 1971. 

> (Cited on page 2.)

Andrew Y Ng, Stuart Russell, et al. Algorithms for inverse reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning , 2000. (Cited on page 7.) 

Caspar Oesterheld, Johannes Treutlein, Roger B Grosse, Vincent Conitzer, and Jakob Foerster. Similarity-based cooperative equilibrium. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,2023. (Cited on page 6.) 

Samir Okasha. Agents and Goals in Evolution . Oxford University Press, 2018. (Cited on page 19.) 

Laurent Orseau, Simon McGregor McGill, and Shane Legg. Agents and devices: A relative definition of agency. arXiv , 2018. arXiv:1805.12387. (Cited on pages 3 and 19.) 

Elisabeth Pacherie. Intentional joint agency: Shared intention lite. Synthese , 190(10):1817–1839, 2013. (Cited on pages 3 and 18.) 

Judea Pearl. Causality . Cambridge University Press, 2009. (Cited on pages 3 and 19.) 

Jonas Peters, Dominik Janzing, and Bernhard Sch ¨olkopf. Elements of Causal Inference: Foundations and Learning Algorithms . MIT Press, 2017. (Cited on pages 5 and 6.) 

Giorgio Piatti, Zhijing Jin, Max Kleiman-Weiner, Bernhard Sch ¨olkopf, Mrinmaya Sachan, and Rada Mihalcea. Cooperate or collapse: emergence of sustainable cooperation in a society of LLM agents. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2024. (Cited on pages 2 and 20.) 

Nina Rajcic and Anders Søgaard. Goal-directedness is in the eye of the beholder. arXiv , 2025. arXiv:2508.13247. (Cited on page 3.) 

Deepak Ramachandran and Eyal Amir. Bayesian inverse reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the 20th International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence , 2007. (Cited on page 19.) 

Debraj Ray. A Game-Theoretic Perspective on Coalition Formation . Oxford University Press, 2007.    

> (Cited on pages 3 and 19.) 16 CAUSAL FOUNDATIONS OF COLLECTIVE AGENCY

Alexander G. Reisach, Alberto Su ´arez, Sebastian Weichwald, and Antoine Chambaz. The case for time in causal DAGs. arXiv , 2025. arXiv:2501.19311. (Cited on page 30.) 

Eigil F. Rischel and Sebastian Weichwald. Compositional abstraction error and a category of causal models. In Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence , 2021. (Cited on pages 8 and 12.) 

Abraham Sesshu Roth. Shared Agency. In Edward N. Zalta, editor, The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University, 2017. (Cited on pages 1 and 18.) 

Paul K. Rubenstein, Sebastian Weichwald, Stephan Bongers, Joris M. Mooij, Dominik Janzing, Moritz Grosse-Wentrup, and Bernhard Sch ¨olkopf. Causal consistency of structural equation models. In Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence , 2017. (Cited on pages 1, 3, and 19.) 

David P. Schweikard and Hans Bernhard Schmid. Collective Intentionality. In Edward N. Zalta, editor, The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University, 2021. (Cited on page 1.) 

John Searle. Collective intentions and actions. In Philip R. Cohen Jerry Morgan and Martha Pollack, editors, Intentions in Communication , pages 401–415. MIT Press, 1990. (Cited on pages 3 and 18.) 

Anil Seth. Measuring emergence via nonlinear granger causality. In Artificial Life XI: Proceedings of the Eleventh International Conference on the Simulation and Synthesis of Living Systems , 2006. 

> (Cited on page 19.)

Joar Skalse and Alessandro Abate. Partial identifiability and misspecification in inverse reinforcement learning. arXiv , 2024. arXiv:2411.15951. (Cited on page 7.) 

John Maynard Smith and E ¨ors Szathm ´ary. The Major Transitions in Evolution . Oxford University Press, 2020. Previously issued in print: Oxford : W.H. Freeman/Spektrum, 1995; Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1997. - Includes bibliographical references and index. - Description based on print version record and publisher information. (Cited on page 19.) 

Oliver Sourbut, Lewis Hammond, and Harriet Wood. Cooperation and control in delegation games. In International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence , 2024. (Cited on page 19.) 

Claudia Szabo and Yong Meng Teo. Formalization of weak emergence in multiagent systems. ACM Transactions on Modeling and Computer Simulation , 26(1):1–25, 2015. (Cited on page 19.) 

Steven Tadelis. Game theory: an introduction . Princeton University Press, 2013. (Cited on page 27.) 

Yong Meng Teo, Ba Linh Luong, and Claudia Szabo. Formalization of emergence in multi-agent systems. In Proceedings of the 1st ACM SIGSIM Conference on Principles of Advanced Discrete Simulation , 2013. (Cited on page 20.) 

Raimo Tuomela. Joint intention, we-mode and I-mode. Midwest Studies in Philosophy , 30(1):35–58, 2006. (Cited on pages 3 and 18.) 

Francis Rhys Ward, Matt MacDermott, Francesco Belardinelli, Francesca Toni, and Tom Everitt. The reasons that agents act: Intention and instrumental goals. In International Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems , 2024. (Cited on page 19.) 17 JØRGENSEN WEICHWALD HAMMOND 

Michael P. Wellman, Karl Tuyls, and Amy Greenwald. Empirical game theoretic analysis: A survey. 

Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research , 82, 2025. (Cited on page 30.) 

Kevin Xia and Elias Bareinboim. Neural causal abstractions. In AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , 2024. (Cited on page 6.) 

Dylan Xu and Juan-Pablo Rivera. Towards measuring goal-directedness in AI systems. arXiv , 2024. arXiv:2410.04683. (Cited on pages 3, 19, and 31.) 

Brian D. Ziebart, J. Andrew Bagnell, and Anind K. Dey. Modeling interaction via the principle of maximum causal entropy. In International Conference on Machine Learning , 2010. (Cited on page 19.) 

Martin Zinkevich, Amy Greenwald, and Michael L. Littman. Cyclic equilibria in Markov games. In 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 18, pages 1641–1648, 2005. (Cited on page 30.) 

Appendix A. Additional Related Work 

Due to space constraints, our discussion of related work in Section 1.2 was rather brief. Here we extend this discussion along several axes. 

Philosophical Foundations of Collective Agency. The question of when multiple individuals constitute a unified collective agent has long occupied philosophers. Early foundational work established the importance of collective intentionality – the capacity for shared intentions and joint commitments – in grounding group agency (Searle, 1990; Tuomela, 2006; Bratman, 2014). Subsequent work has refined these accounts, examining the semantics of collective intentional behavior (Ludwig, 2007), distinguishing between different modes of shared intention (Pacherie, 2013), and exploring the relationship between collective intentions and team agency (Gold and Sugden, 2007). List and Pettit (2011) provide a more functionalist account, arguing that a group can be considered an agent in its own right when it has representational states, motivational states, and a capacity to process these states, even when individual members may lack shared beliefs or desires. A key challenge across these accounts is the aggregation problem : determining when coordinated behavior among individuals reflects genuine collective agency rather than merely the sum of individual actions (Anderson, 1972; Roth, 2017). This question becomes particularly acute when considering systems that exhibit goal-directed behavior at multiple levels of abstraction, from neural subsystems within individual minds (Minsky, 1988) to emergent patterns in complex adaptive systems (Mitchell, 2009). It is worth noting that the question of collective agency is distinct from, though related to, that of collective intelligence (Malone and Bernstein, 2015), the latter focusing more on problem-solving capabilities than on unified agency per se. While these philosophical frameworks provide important conceptual foundations, they generally lack the formal machinery needed to rigorously identify collective agents or predict when they will emerge. 

Causal Definitions of Individual Agency. Recent work has made important progress on rigorously defining and identifying individual agents using tools from causality and decision theory. Essentially, this is because any notion of goal-directedness – which is intrinsic to agency – requires considering what a putative agent would have done differently to achieve their goal, had their circumstances been different. Early work in AI and multi-agent systems developed formal models of joint action    

> 18 CAUSAL FOUNDATIONS OF COLLECTIVE AGENCY

and cooperation (Levesque et al., 1990), though these typically assumed rather than derived the conditions for collective agency. Most closely related to our work, Kenton et al. (2023) propose a causal discovery algorithm for identifying agents from empirical data. Others define and detect agency based on how predictive the assumption of utility-maximizing behavior is of a system’s observed behavior: Orseau et al. (2018) use Bayesian inverse reinforcement learning (Ramachandran and Amir, 2007) to infer the extent to which a given system is a goal-directed agent, whereas MacDermott et al. (2024) use a maximal causal entropy model (Ziebart et al., 2010) to measure goal-directedness. More recently, others have attempted to apply such definitions to measure the goal-directedness not just of RL but also LLM-based agents (Xu and Rivera, 2024; Everitt et al., 2025). A related but separate research thread has studied causal definitions of intention (Halpern and Kleiman-Weiner, 2018; Ward et al., 2024). None of these works, however, formally consider the question of collective agents, where multiple subsystems have different actions, observations, and incentives. 

Multi-Agent Formalisms and Collective Behavior. For settings with multiple agents, Hammond et al. (2023) provide a formal framework – known as causal games – by generalizing multi-agent influence diagrams (Koller and Milch, 2003) to the higher levels of Pearl’s causal hierarchy (Pearl, 2009). 9 Other game-theoretic approaches, such as coalition structures in cooperative game theory (Ray, 2007; Elkind and Rothe, 2016), provide models of when subgroups might form and what outcomes they might achieve, but do not address whether such coalitions constitute unified agents. Complementing these formal frameworks, a substantial literature examines collective intelligence and emergent behavior in multi-agent systems, from swarm algorithms (Bonabeau et al., 1999) to collective decision-making in biological groups (Couzin, 2009). Several works have developed formal methods for detecting or measuring emergent phenomena by comparing micro- and macro-level descriptions (Kub ´ık, 2003; Seth, 2006; Szabo and Teo, 2015) or by measuring changes in collective capabilities (Sourbut et al., 2024). Others have proposed theoretical frameworks for emergent agency drawing on active inference (Friston et al., 2022) or evolutionary perspectives (Okasha, 2018; Smith and Szathm ´ary, 2020). However, these approaches either measure emergence empirically without providing normative criteria for when collective agency exists, or apply to specific domains without offering a general framework for identifying collective agents across contexts. 

Causal Abstraction. The notion that systems can be accurately described at multiple levels of abstraction has been formalized in the causal modelling literature through the concept of causal abstraction. Rubenstein et al. (2017) and Beckers and Halpern (2019) develop frameworks for determining when a high-level causal model is a valid abstraction of a more detailed low-level model, preserving causal relationships even when variables are aggregated or details are omitted. Beckers et al. (2020) extend this to allow for approximate abstractions that sacrifice some precision for greater simplicity. These frameworks provide rigorous criteria for when a simplified model faithfully represents the causal structure of a more complex system – precisely the kind of tool needed to determine when viewing a group of agents as a single collective agent is justified. However, existing causal abstraction work has focused primarily on single-agent causal influence diagrams or on causal models without decision-makers. Applying these ideas to multi-agent settings, where the low-level      

> 9. In the same paper, Hammond et al. (2023) also introduce mechanized causal games, in which the parameters or decision rules of variables are explicitly represented as mechanism nodes, allowing Kenton et al. (2023) to discover which elements correspond to decisions and utilities.
> 19 JØRGENSEN WEICHWALD HAMMOND

model involves multiple decision-makers with potentially conflicting objectives, requires extending the abstraction framework to handle the strategic interactions captured by causal games. 

AI Safety and Multi-Agent Risks. Our primary motivation is the safety and control of networks of advanced AI agents, and in particular the possibility of emergent ‘super-agents’ with dangerous or unexpected capabilities or goals. A key safety challenge is that multiple, simpler AI systems might inadvertently form a collective agent with capabilities and objectives distinct from any individual in the group (Hammond et al., 2025). Compared to AI tools, the ability of artificial agents to make plans and take actions in pursuit of complex goals makes them not only more useful, but also more harmful if those goals are misaligned (Chan et al., 2023). For example, competitive pressures may lead individually rational AI agents to rapidly exhaust collective resources (Piatti et al., 2024), or a group of agents might combine their harmless individual capabilities to override safeguards and execute dangerous attacks (Jones et al., 2024). Several works have examined emergent capabilities in multi-agent AI systems (Chen et al., 2009; Teo et al., 2013), though most focus on identifying specific emergent behaviors rather than general conditions for collective agency. Drexler (2019) proposes that a comprehensive set of narrow AI ‘services’ could provide a safer alternative to monolithic superintelligence, though this depends on preventing unwanted collective agents from emerging. Understanding when and how collective agency arises is therefore critical for anticipating and mitigating multi-agent AI risks. 

Appendix B. Battle of the sexes example 

Example 1 Battle of the sexes. We illustrate the formalism with the classic two-player coordination game ‘battle of the sexes’, shown in Table 2. 

Table 2: Battle of the sexes payoff matrix Opera Football Opera p2, 1q p0, 0q

Football p0, 0q p1, 2q

The mechanized SCM m M consists of a deterministic cyclic SCM with signature 

rD1 P r 0, 1s

rD2 P r 0, 1s

rU1 P ZtO,F uˆt O,F u

rU2 P ZtO,F uˆt O,F u.

rD1 and rD2 specify probability distributions over ‘opera’ and ‘football’ (the number in r0, 1s repre-sents the probability of picking opera). rU1 and rU2 : tO, F u ˆ t O, F u Ñ Z specify the payoffs of the two players’ decisions (for example, in the battle of the sexes, rU1pO, O q “ 2, see Table 2). The 

> 20

CAUSAL FOUNDATIONS OF COLLECTIVE AGENCY 

rD1 rD2

D1 D2

U1 U2

rU1 rU2

Figure 4: Mechanized causal graph for 2x2 games (of which battle of the sexes is an example). Dashed edges represent edges in the mechanisms model. Solid edges represent edges in the object-level model. Gray edges link mechanism variables with object variables. The distribution of D1, which corresponds to the decision of player 1, depends on the conditional distribution of U1 given D1 and D2 and the marginal distribution of D2. This is represented by the dashed edges from rU1 to rD1 and rD2 to rD1, respectively. If player 1 is choosing a strategy using best response rationality (see Definition 10) with utility equal to the payoff, then player 1 will not respond to changes in rU2 if rD2 is kept fixed. Therefore, rD1 does not functionally depend on rU2 and we draw no dashed edge from rU2

to rD1.

parameterized SCM is given by the structural assignments 

F rD1 

> D1

pED1 q “ 

#

O ED1 ď rD1

F otherwise 

F rD2 

> D2

pED2 q “ 

#

O ED2 ď rD2

F otherwise 

F rU1 

> U1

pD1, D 2, EU1 q “ rU1pD1, D 2q

F rU2 

> U2

pD1, D 2, EU2 q “ rU2pD1, D 2q

ED1 , ED2 „ Unif p0, 1q. We assume that the payoffs are deterministic in the decisions, and so, the distributions of the noise variables EU1 , EU2 are irrelevant. 

21 JØRGENSEN WEICHWALD HAMMOND 

We now specify the mechanism model ĂM. We assume that the payoffs are as specified in Table 2, that is, 

F rU1 p rV q “ 

$’’’’&’’’’%

pO, O q Þ Ñ 2

pF, F q Þ Ñ 1

pO, F q Þ Ñ 0

pF, O q Þ Ñ 0

F rU2 p rV q “ 

$’’’’&’’’’%

pO, O q Þ Ñ 1

pF, F q Þ Ñ 2

pO, F q Þ Ñ 0

pF, O q Þ Ñ 0.

The assignments for the payoff mechanisms constantly return the payoff function specified in Table 2 (irrespective of the policies of the players). We assume that the rD1 and rD2 act as to optimize the expected value of their respective payoffs, that is, 

F rD1 p rD2, rU1, rU2q P arg max 

> rd1Pr 0,1s

E rU1, rU2, rd1, rD2 pU1q

F rD2 p rD1, rU1, rU2q P arg max 

> rd2Pr 0,1s

E rU1, rU2, rD1, rd2 pU2q

Notice that F rD1 depends trivially on rU2, and F rD2 depends trivially on rU1. It is well known that this system of equations has three solutions Sp ĂMq “ t rs1, rs2, rs3u where 

Πt rD1, rD2uprs1q “ t 1 rD1 , 1 rD2 u

Πt rD1, rD2uprs2q “ t 0 rD1 , 0 rD2 u

Πt rD1, rD2uprs3q “ 

" 23 rD1

, 13 rD2

*

,

representing the three Nash equilibria. 

Appendix C. First mover rationality 

In this section, we define first mover rationality, which corresponds to making a decision and then assuming that the other players will adapt their decisions in response to that. In order to act like a first mover, an agent must have a belief model indicating which other nodes are believed to be agents and what their utility functions are believed to be. 

Definition 18 Let a mechanized causal graph mM and mechanism variable rS P rV be given. A 

belief model is a tuple p rA, Uq where 

‚ rA “ p rA1, . . . , rAnq is a sequence of distinct nodes in rV zt rSu. Intuitively, it corresponds to the set of nodes believed to be agents by rS.

22 CAUSAL FOUNDATIONS OF COLLECTIVE AGENCY 

‚ U “ p U1, . . . , Unq is a sequence of utility functions. Intuitively, Ui is the utility believed by rS

to belong to agent Ai.

Given a belief model, we can define first mover rationality as the decision that maximizes the expected utility given that other agents (according to the belief model) employ best response rationality. 

Definition 19 We define first mover rationality RFM  

> rS

for rS P rV under belief model p rA, Uq and utility U by the condition that, for rc P ran p rV zt rSuq ,

rs P RFM  

> rS

prcq if and only if rs P

"

Π rS prvq | rv P arg max 

> rwPR

E rwpUpV qq 

*

,

where R are those rv of ran p rV q for which 

‚ Π rV z rAprvq “ Π rV z rAprcq. That is, non-agents do not respond by altering their distributions. 

‚ For all rAi P rA, Π rAi prvq P RBR 

> rAi;Ui

pΠ rV zt rAiuprvqq , where RBR 

> rAi;Ui

is the best response rationality relation for rAi with utility Ui. That is, other agents are assumed to respond RBR -rationally to their own utility functions. 

In the following example we show that whether or not we have collective agency depends on the rationality principle employed by the agents. Concretely, we show an example where best response rationality does not induce collective agency, whereas first mover rationality does. 

Example 2 Two agents with shared utility. 

Consider a situation where we have two RBR -agents optimizing a shared utility function. Signature given by 

rD1 P t 0, 1u

rD2 P t 0, 1u

rU P Rt0,1uˆt 0,1u,

and object variables 

F rd1 

> D1

pED1 q “ rd1

F rd2 

> D2

pED2 q “ rd2

F ruU pD1, D 2, EU q “ rupD1, D 2q.

Assume that rD1 and rD2 are both RBR -rational with respect to utility Upvq “ ΠU pvq, that is, 

F rD1 p rD2, rU q P arg max 

> rd1Pt 0,1u

E rU , rd1, rD2 pU q

F rD2 p rD1, rU q P arg max 

> rd2Pt 0,1u

E rU , rD1, rd2 pU q.

23 JØRGENSEN WEICHWALD HAMMOND 

Since both agents are optimizing the same utility function, we may wonder if we can abstract this model into a collective agent, that is, a model with a single ( RBR , U) agent. Consider high-level mM˚ given by mechanism signature 

rD˚ P t 0, 1u2

rU ˚ P Rt0,1uˆt 0,1u

and object variables 

F rd˚ 

> D˚

pED˚ q “ rd˚

F ru˚  

> U˚

pD˚, EU ˚ q “ ru˚pD˚q.

Consider the value mappings 

τD˚ pt d1, d 2uq “ p d1, d 2q

τU ˚ puq “ u

and intervention mappings given by 

ω rD˚ pt rd1, rd2uq “ p rd1, rd2q

ω rU ˚ pruq “ ru. 

Assume that rD˚ is RBR -rational with respect to utility U ˚ that is, Upv˚q “ ΠU ˚ pv˚q. Consider the following mechanism for U :

ru “ p d1, d 2q Þ Ñ 1pd1 “ d2 “ 0q ` 21pd1 “ d2 “ 1q

We can convince ourselves that mM˚ is not a mechanized abstraction of mM since Sp ĂM; ruq “ tt 0 rD1 , 0 rD2 , ruu, t1 rD1 , 1 rD2 , ruuu and Sp ĂM˚; ωpuqq “ ttp 1, 1q rD˚ , ruuu , have different cardinalities. If, on the other hand rD1 and rD2 had employed first mover rationality with accurate belief models, then 

F rD1 p rD2, rU q P arg max 

> rd1Pt 0,1u

max 

> rd2Pt 0,1u

E rU , rd1, rd2 pU q

F rD2 p rD1, rU q P arg max 

> rd2Pt 0,1u

max 

> rd1Pt 0,1u

E rU , rd1, rd2 pU q,

and mM˚ would be a strong mechanized abstraction of mM, suggesting that we can view rD1 and 

rD2 as a collective RBR -agent. 

Appendix D. Formal description of the actor-critic example (Section 1.1 and Section 4.3) 

Formally, consider the signature 10 

10. Rather than having object nodes W and Y , representing the utilities of critic and actor, respectively, we could have represented the utilities as external quantities computed from the object nodes, cf. Definition 8. Here, we choose to represent the utilities as object nodes to closely follow the presentation in Kenton et al. (2023). 

24 CAUSAL FOUNDATIONS OF COLLECTIVE AGENCY 

rR P r 0, 1s2 Probability of reward signal (+1) given state 0 or 1. 

ĂW P t 1u Utility of the critic W :“ ´p R ´ Y q2

rY P t 1u Utility of the actor Y :“ QpAq

rS P r 0, 1s2 Probability of state 1 given action 0 or 1. 

rQ P r 0, 1s2 Critic pQ :“ rQq

rA P t 0, 1u Action ( A :“ rA)And structural assignments encoding that the actor and critic are playing best response to Y and W ,respectively: 

rR :“ p r0, r 1q

ĂW :“ 1

rY :“ 1

rS :“ p s0, s 1q

rQ :“

´ rRr0sp 1 ´ rSr0sq ` rRr1s rSr0s, rRr0sp 1 ´ rSr1sq ` rRr1s rSr1s

¯rA :“ 1p rQr0s ď rQr1sq .

Since the mechanism graph is acyclic, there is only one solution rs to this system of equations. Let us consider the following abstraction of the system: 

rR˚ P r 0, 1s2 Probability of reward signal (+1) given state 0 or 1 

rS˚ P r 0, 1s2 Probability of state 1 given action 

rA˚ P t 0, 1u Action ( A :“ rA˚),

with structural assignments 

rR˚ :“ p r0, r 1q

rS˚ :“ p s0, s 1q

rA˚ :“ 1

´ rS˚r0s rR˚r1s ` p 1 ´ rS˚r0sq rR˚r0s ď rS˚r1s rR˚r1s ` p 1 ´ rS˚r1sq rR˚r0s

¯

.

To tie the models together, we define the value mappings and intervention mappings 

τA˚ paq “ a ω rA˚ praq “ raτS˚ psq “ s ω rS˚ prsq “ rsτR˚ prq “ r ω rR˚ prrq “ rr. 

Appendix E. Proof of Proposition 16 

Proposition 16. Let mechanized models mM and mM˚ be given. Assume that mM˚ is a strong mechanized abstraction of mM for some value mappings tτV ˚ uV ˚PV ˚ and intervention mappings 

25 JØRGENSEN WEICHWALD HAMMOND 

tω rV ˚ u rV ˚P rV ˚ . Let rS˚ P rV ˚ be a high-level mechanism variable. Assume that (i) τPA S˚ is injective, and (ii) the mechanism nodes in A rS˚ have independent mechanisms. Then rS˚ is not a non-trivial agent in m M˚.

Proof Let rc˚ 

> 1

, rc˚ 

> 2

P ran p rV ˚zt rS˚uq be arbitrary settings. Since mM˚ is a strong abstraction of mM, there exists low-level interventions ry1, ry2 P ran pA rV ˚zt rS˚uq such that ω rV ˚zt rS˚upry1q “ rc˚

> 1

and ω rV ˚zt rS˚upry2q “ rc˚ 

> 2

. Since the mechanism nodes in A rS˚ have independent mechanisms, 

PSp ĂM;ry2qpAS˚ | APA S˚ q “ PSp ĂM;ry1qpAS˚ | APA S˚ q, which implies that PSp ĂM;ry1qpτS˚ pAS˚ q | 

τPA S˚ pAPA S˚ qq “ PSp ĂM;ry2qpτS˚ pAS˚ q | τPA S˚ pAPA S˚ qq by injectivity of τPA S˚ . Causal consis-tency (Definition 14) now implies that 

Prc˚    

> 1,FrS˚prc˚
> 1q

pS˚ | PA S˚ q “ PSp ĂM˚;rc˚ 

> 1q

pS˚ | PA S˚ q“ PSp ĂM;ry1qpτS˚ pAS˚ q | τPA S˚ pAPA S˚ qq “ PSp ĂM;ry2qpτS˚ pAS˚ q | τPA S˚ pAPA S˚ qq “ PSp ĂM˚;rc˚ 

> 2q

pS˚ | PA S˚ q“ Prc˚    

> 2,FrS˚prc˚
> 2q

pS˚ | PA S˚ q

Since rc˚ 

> 1

, rc˚ 

> 2

P ran p rV ˚zt rS˚uq were arbitrary, we have that rS˚ is not a non-trivial agent. 

Appendix F. Proof of Proposition 17 

Proposition 17. In Figure 2 (see also Section D for details), mM˚ is a strong mechanized abstraction of mM. Furthermore, rA˚ in the high-level model mM˚ is an pRBR , Uq-agent with utility equal to the reward Upv˚q “ ΠR˚ pv˚q.

Proof 

To show that mM˚ is a strong mechanized abstraction, we need to show that (1) consistency holds for all low-level interventions where ω is defined, and (2) ω rV ˚ is surjective onto ran p rV ˚q for all 

rV ˚ P rV ˚.First, consider surjectivity. Since the intervention mappings are the identity functions and the ranges of the relevant low-level and high-level variables are identical, we have surjectivity. Second, we check consistency. Let ry “ tp s0, s 1q rS , pr0, r 1q rRu be an arbitrary low-level intervention on A rS˚ Y A rR˚ “ t rR, rSu. Then ωpryq “ tp s0, s 1q rS˚ , pr0, r 1q rR˚ u and 

Sp ĂM˚; ωpryqq “ ␣␣ ps0, s 1q rS˚ , pr0, r 1q rR˚ , 1 ps0r1 ` p 1 ´ s0qr0 ď s1r1 ` p 1 ´ s1qr0q rA˚

(( 

In the low-level model m M:

Sp ĂM; ryq “ 

!! 

pr0, r 1q rR, 1 rY , 1ĂW , ps0, s 1q rS ,

pr0p1 ´ s0q ` r1s0, r 0p1 ´ s1q ` r1s1q rQ ,

1 ps0r1 ` p 1 ´ s0qr0 ď s1r1 ` p 1 ´ s1qr0q rA

)) 

26 CAUSAL FOUNDATIONS OF COLLECTIVE AGENCY 

Since A˚ and A are equal to 0 and 1 for the same values of r0, r 1, s 0, s 1, we have that 

PSp ĂM;ryqpτ pV qq “ PSp ĂM˚;ωpryqq pV ˚q

A similar calculation shows consistency for interventions on other elements in tŤ    

> V˚PrY˚

A rV ˚ |

rY ˚ Ď rV ˚u.We want to argue that in the abstracted model, rA˚ is RBR rational under utility function Upv˚q “ 

ΠR˚ pv˚q. So we must argue that rA˚ responds RBR -rationally to U. Consider context rc “tp s0, s 1q rS˚ , pr0, r 1q rR˚ u and the responses 0 rA˚ or 1 rA˚ :

Et0 rA˚ ,ps0,s 1q rS˚ ,pr0,r 1q rR˚ upR˚q “ s0r1 ` p 1 ´ s0qr0

Et1 rA˚ ,ps0,s 1q rS˚ ,pr0,r 1q rR˚ upR˚q “ s1r1 ` p 1 ´ s1qr0

So 

RBR  

> rA˚

prcq “ 

$’&’%

t1 rA˚ u s1r1 ` p 1 ´ s1qr0 ą s0r1 ` p 1 ´ s0qr0

t0 rA˚ u s1r1 ` p 1 ´ s1qr0 ă s0r1 ` p 1 ´ s0qr0

t0 rA˚ , 1 rA˚ u s1r1 ` p 1 ´ s1qr0 “ s0r1 ` p 1 ´ s0qr0,

and we conclude that F rA˚ prcq P RBR  

> rA˚

prcq for every rc P ran p rV ˚zt rA˚uq .

Appendix G. Further details on Section 5 

The code to reproduce all results is available at this link. It runs within a few minutes on a standard laptop. 

G.1. Voting mechanisms 

We consider three different voting mechanisms: Vickrey-Clarke-Groves (VCG), Median Voting, and Random Dictator. 

VCG Voting. Under VCG voting, each citizen reports the parameters of their utility function and monetary transfers ensure that citizens are incentivized to report their true parameters (Tadelis, 2013): 

ˆaci “ p aci ´ λci q, ˆbci “ bci , ˆdci “ dci . The mechanism then chooses the social optimum within each country, i.e. 

qNE  

> c

pλq “ arg max 

> qcPR

ÿ

> i

´

ˆaci qc ´ ˆbci q2 

> c

´ ˆdci Q2

> W

¯

.

While this voting mechanism is unrealistic, it serves as a simple baseline example: since this sum has the same form as Equation (2), we can calculate the low-level NE analytically using Equation (3). This also means that, for the VCG mechanism, we know that the high-level model is an exact mechanized abstraction of the low-level model, and we can compare the estimated parameters to ground-truth parameters. 

27 JØRGENSEN WEICHWALD HAMMOND 

Median Voting. For Median Voting, we cannot calculate the low-level NE analytically. Therefore, we approximate it using iterative best response. In particular, we initialize all pollution levels to 0 and then iteratively update the response of each country using the median vote within that country (using a damping factor of 0.3). We do this until convergence (tolerance of 1e-6 in the 2-norm). 

Random Dictator. For Random Dictator voting, we randomly select a dictator from each country and use the dictators’ utility functions to derive the low-level Nash equilibrium. 

G.2. Further details on experiments Population structure. We consider a population of 5 countries and 1000 citizens in total. The sizes are sampled from a log-normal distribution and scaled to sum to 1000. The countries and citizens are fixed throughout the experiments. 

Citizen parameters. The citizen parameters are sampled i.i.d. uniformly within the ranges 

aci P r 0.35 , 0.65 s,bci P r 7, 13 s{ Nc,dci P r 0.05 , 0.15 s{ C, 

where Nc is the size of country c, and C is the number of countries. The parameter ranges are manually chosen to be somewhat reasonable. 

Interventions λ. We sample different intervention means for each country. The means are sampled uniformly within the range r0.0, 0.1s. Given a mean λc, we sample interventions on individual citizens from the beta distribution with mean 10 λc and concentration parameter 10. We then scale the sampled values back to the range r0.0, 0.1s.

δc estimation. For each country c, we sample 10 interventions where pλci qc “ 0, that is, no intervention on country c. We estimate δc by linear regression of qc on QW (which is justified by Equation (3)). For random dictator voting, instead of estimating δc, we plug in the sum 1

> Nc

ř 

> i dci
> bci

as an estimate (the mean of citizen-level δci “ dci {bci ). We do this to give the model a better chance of learning a useful ω. Estimating δc using the regression methods introduces bias since there is positive correlation between qc and QW introduced by the stochasticity of picking the dictator. Alternatively, we could estimate δc using several regressions, each with a fixed dictator, and then take an average. 

Surrogate model architecture. We use a fully connected neural network with 4 hidden layers of 128, 256, 256, and 128 neurons respectively. We use the ReLU activation function for all layers. The input is the intervention vector pλci qci for all citizens and the output is αc for each country. 

Training procedure. We train the model on 1,000 intervention samples for 100 epochs using the Adam optimizer with a learning rate of 10 ´3 and a batch size of 32. The results are evaluated on 500 held-out test interventions. 

G.3. Further details on results    

> 28 CAUSAL FOUNDATIONS OF COLLECTIVE AGENCY

Country Citizens MAE( δc) MAE( αc) MAE( qc) Baseline MAE( qc)0 180 0.000 0.025 0.011 0.233 1 107 0.000 0.029 0.007 0.159 2 202 0.000 0.065 0.017 0.256 3 412 0.000 0.107 0.022 0.468 4 99 0.000 0.025 0.005 0.138 Table 3: Results for VCG mechanism. We report the Mean Absolute Error (MAE) for the parameters 

δc and αc, and for the pollution outcome qc. We also include the baseline MAE for qc,which is the MAE if we constantly predict the ground truth low-level Nash equilibrium at 

λ “ 0. The model is « 95% better than the baseline, see Table 1. For VCG we can recover 

δc perfectly using Equation (3) and two distinct pqNE  

> c

, Q NE  

> W

q pairs. Country Citizens MAE( qc) Baseline MAE( qc)0 180 0.029 0.235 1 107 0.032 0.144 2 202 0.025 0.259 3 412 0.035 0.479 4 99 0.021 0.131 Table 4: Results for Median Voting mechanism. In contrast to VCG, we have no ground truth parameters αc and δc to compare with. However, the surrogate model still accurately predicts the pollution outcome qc, suggesting that a collective agency framework can effectively model median voting mechanisms. 

Appendix H. Applications to MARL and LLM Agents 

In this appendix, we discuss how our theoretical framework for collective agency may be applied to multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) and large language model (LLM) agents, and how it connects to AI safety. While a full treatment of these applications is beyond the scope of this work, we hope that the discussion below provides useful starting points for future research. 

H.1. Applications to MARL 

There are several subtleties that arise when attempting to translate insights from our framework in to the MARL setting. Here we provide a set of initial suggestions and observations that we hope makes the practical use of our formalism to MARL settings more straightforward. Such settings may provide a natural testbed for experimentation prior to developing real-world applications. 

Approximate Equilibria and Bounded Rationality. A key feature of our framework is that it is agnostic to the specific notion of rationality employed by the agents. The rationality relation R (see Definition 10 and Section C) can encode a wide range of behavioral assumptions: exact best response, 

ε-best response, gradient-based learning rules, or any other decision procedure. This flexibility means that the framework applies even when agents are only approximately rational, as is typical in MARL, where agents may use gradient-based policy optimization and converge only to approximate equilibria. In such settings, one could define a rationality relation that captures ε-optimality or local   

> 29 JØRGENSEN WEICHWALD HAMMOND

Country Citizens MAE( qc) Baseline MAE( qc)0 180 0.949 0.878 1 107 0.530 0.525 2 202 1.163 1.042 3 412 1.916 1.694 4 99 0.519 0.506 Table 5: Results for Random Dictator mechanism. We use δc “ 1

> Nc

ř 

> i dci
> bci

. The baseline is the average low-level random dictator Nash equilibrium at λ “ 0 (averaged over dictator draws). The model performs worse than the baseline overall (-9.3%), see Table 1. optimality, and then ask whether a collective agent model under this relaxed rationality relation constitutes a valid mechanized abstraction of the low-level system. 

Learning Dynamics and Non-Stationarity. The mechanized causal games studied in this paper can be thought of as modeling equilibria: the solutions Sp ĂMq correspond to settings of the mechanism variables that are mutually consistent given the rationality relations. On the one hand, this is useful because our framework applies regardless of the algorithm that agents use to reach an equilibrium (whether they use gradient-based learning, linear programming, or some other method). On the other hand, the models in this paper do not naturally support analysis of the learning dynamics themselves, or the non-stationarity that arises when agents are simultaneously updating their strategies. In particular, MARL algorithms can produce cycles in strategy space (Zinkevich et al., 2005), which are not captured by equilibrium-based models. Understanding the relationship between causal models and dynamical systems more generally is an active area of research; see, e.g., Reisach et al. (2025) for a discussion of complications and ambiguities related to the relationship between causal models and time, and Jørgensen et al. (2025) for ambiguities related to interventions. 

Empirical Game-Theoretic Analysis. One promising avenue for applying our framework to large or complex MARL settings is through empirical game-theoretic analysis (Wellman et al., 2025). In this approach, overall policies (which might be large neural networks in practice) are modeled as pure strategies in a ‘meta-game’, which is then iteratively expanded and refined. By constructing a mechanized causal game at the level of the meta-game, it becomes possible to tractably analyze complex MARL settings using the tools from game theory and causal abstraction that we develop in this paper. 

H.2. Applications to LLM-Based Multi-Agent Systems 

Multi-agent systems composed of LLM-based agents are becoming increasingly common, from debate protocols (Irving et al., 2018; Du et al., 2024; Li et al., 2025) to multi-agent problem-solving and planning systems. Our framework provides a principled way to ask: when does a group of LLM agents, each with its own prompt, context, and objectives, act as if it were a single collective agent pursuing a coherent goal? 

Collusion in Debate and AI Oversight. One possible application is to debate-based AI safety protocols (Irving et al., 2018). The effectiveness of AI safety via debate relies on the debating agents being adversarial rather than collectively pursuing a shared goal. If the debating agents were to collude – effectively forming a collective agent that optimizes for some objective other than truthful    

> 30 CAUSAL FOUNDATIONS OF COLLECTIVE AGENCY

argumentation – the safety guarantees of the debate protocol could break down. Similarly, in other settings where safety arises from some kind of automated oversight or adversarial relationship, cooperation is often undesirable. Our framework allows one to rule out collective agency under certain conditions (Proposition 16 provides a simple example), which could be used to provide assurance that mechanisms like debate are not illegibly pursuing unintended goals. 

Emergent Goals in Networks of LLM Agents. More generally, whenever multiple LLM agents interact – whether through explicit communication channels, shared memory, or indirect coordination via a shared environment – our framework can be used to assess whether emergent collective agency is present and, if so, what objective the collective agent appears to be optimizing. Recent work on measuring goal-directedness in individual LLM agents (Xu and Rivera, 2024; Everitt et al., 2025) provides complementary tools that could be combined with our collective agency framework to detect and characterize emergent group-level goals in multi-agent LLM systems.