Title: 2605.04475v1.pdf

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.04475v1

Published Time: Thu, 07 May 2026 00:26:32 GMT

Number of Pages: 43

Markdown Content:
Information Coordination as a Bridge: A Neuro -Symbolic Architecture for 

## Reliable Autonomous Driving Scene Understanding 

Shuo  Liu a, Lei Shi b,c , Haowen  Liu a, Jing Xu a, Yufei Gao b,c, Yucheng Shi *a     

> aSchool of Computer and Artificial Intelligence, Zhengzhou University, 450001, Zhengzhou, China
> bSchool of Cyber Science and Engineering, Zhengzhou University, 45000 1, Zhengzhou, China
> cSongshan Laboratory, 450003, Zhengzhou, China

Abstract 

Reliable autonomous driving requires scene understanding that is semantically consistent across 

heterogeneous sensors and verifiable at the reasoning stage. However, many recent LLM -driven 

driving systems attach the language model as a post -processor and force it to reason over 

redundant or conflicting perception outputs, which can amplify hallucinated entities and unsafe 

conclusions. This paper proposes InfoCoordiBridge, a BEV -centric neuro -symbolic architecture 

that inserts an explicit coordination bridge between perception and language reasoning. 

InfoCoordiBridge comprises (i ) a unified multi -agent perception layer that outputs typed 

structured facts together with modality -focused synopses, (ii) an ICA module that aligns and fuses 

multi -source outputs into a single SceneSummary, and (iii) an SSRE module that performs 

SceneSummary -grounded reasoning with verification.  Experiments on nuScenes and Waymo 

show that ICA preserves competitive 3D detection accuracy while substantially improving fusion 

consistency, reducing redundancy to below 1% and achieving about 98% attribute agreement. On 

NuScenes -QA and a template -aligned Waymo -QA benchmark, SSRE improves factual grounding 

and reduces hallucinated entity mentions compared with representative VLM and agentic 

baselines.  Overall, by coordinating multi -sensor outputs into a single conflict -aware 

SceneSummary before prompting, InfoCoordiBridge prevents redundant and cross -modally 

inconsistent perception evidence from propagating into high -level reasoning. 

Keywords:  Autonomous driving ; Neuro -symbolic architecture ; Information coordination and 

abstraction ; Large language models ; Knowledge -based reasoning; Hallucination mitigation .

1. Introduction 

Autonomous driving robustness critically depends on whether the perception stack can 

deliver accurate and interpretable scene understanding in complex, open -world traffic. Multimodal 

sensor fusion has therefore become a cornerstone for reliable environment perception  (Peng, et al., 

2022 ). Among existing representations, bird’s -eye -view (BEV) unifies heterogeneous sensor 

viewpoints while retaining both rich visual semantics and precise geometric structure. 

Representative BEV -based fusion methods, such as BEVFusion  (Z. Liu, et al., 2023 ) and 

TransFusion  (Bai, et al., 2022 ), show that feature -level fusion in BEV space can substantially 

improve downstream tasks (e.g., 3D object detection), marking a key milestone in multimodal 

perception. 

Despite these advances, BEV -centric fusion remains largely confined to a closed -set 

perception paradigm: models typically output a predefined set of low -level annotations such as 

bounding boxes and segmentation masks  (L. Wang, et al., 2023 ). However, high -level driving 

decisions require deeper scene understanding —inferring traffic participants’ intents, resolving complex interactions, and reasoning about atypical events —which calls for open -world 

commonsense and logical reasoning. Large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated strong 

capabilities in natural language understanding and reasoning, offering a promising opportunity to 

bridge the semantic gap between perception outputs and decision making  (Ahn, et al., 2022 ).

Motivated by this opportunity, recent studies integrate LLMs into autonomous driving 

pipelines.  They condition planning on perception outputs  (X. Huang, et al., 2024 ) or answer 

natural -language questions about driving scenes  (Qian, et al., 2024 ). This trend, however, exposes 

a critical tension: cross -modal perception results are often semantically inconsistent, while LLMs 

lack built -in priors to reconcile such inconsistencies and are therefore prone to hallucinations. 

Prior work reports that, in safety -critical domains such as autonomous driving, LLMs may 

generate plausible -sounding yet reality -inconsistent conclusions  (Chakraborty, et al., 2025 ; Heo, et 

al., 2025 ). The resulting risk has become a major bottleneck for trustworthy open -world scene 

understanding and directly motivates this work. 

At the architectural level, many pioneering attempts treat the LLM as a loosely coupled 

post -processor placed after the perception front -end.  Under this paradigm, inconsistencies in 

upstream perception cannot be corrected before decision -making and are directly propagated into 

high -level reasoning. The LLM therefore consumes perception outputs as fixed inputs, without an 

explicit mechanism to reconcile conflicts prior to reasoning.  When camera and LiDAR reports 

conflict due to noise, the pipeline lacks an explicit step to detect the inconsistency, match the 

corresponding entities, and reconcile their attributes.  This paradigm inevitably amplifies 

hallucination risks and renders the decision pipeline opaque, posing severe challenges for 

safety -critical applications. 

Taken together, semantic inconsistency and hallucination -prone reasoning constitute key 

obstacles to reliable driving cognition. The central challenge is therefore to design an autonomous 

driving cognition framework that leverages the reasoning power of LLMs while ensuring that 

decisions are grounded in an accurate, globally consistent world representation.   

> Figure 1. Overview of InfoCoordiBridge: an explicit coordination bridge from multimodal perception to verifiable
> reasoning.

To address this challenge, we propose InfoCoordiBridge, a structured neuro -symbolic architecture that introduces an Information Coordination and Abstraction (ICA) module as an 

explicit interface between perception and reasoning.  As illustrated in Figure 1, the architecture 

comprises :

(i)  a unified -interface multi -agent perception layer that outputs standardized structured facts 

(JSON) together with brief modality -focused synopses, where specialized agents (Camera, LiDAR, 

Radar, and BEVFusion) contribute complementary evidence under the same schema . This 

standardization reduces redundant descriptions and stabilizes the inputs to downstream 

coordination and reasoning. 

(ii)  an ICA module that performs deterministic coordinate normalization, cross -source entity 

alignment, and conflict -aware attribute fusion to generate a single auditable SceneSummary with 

traceable source references . This module helps fix the direct propagation of duplicated entities and 

cross -modal inconsistencies into the reasoning stage. 

(iii)  a SceneSummary -Driven Reasoning Engine (SSRE) that executes a four -stage verifiable 

workflow (SSP, SRA, VRCG, and IVL) to keep LLM inference entity -grounded and iteratively 

checked . This workflow helps  improve  hallucination -prone reasoning and reduces unverified 

safety conclusions under open -world uncertainty. 

Building on this architecture, our contributions are threefold: 

(1)  We propose InfoCoordiBridge, a BEV -centric neuro -symbolic framework that explicitly 

bridges perception and language reasoning via information coordination. 

(2)  We introduce the ICA -based SceneSummary construction for deterministic multi -source 

alignment and conflict -aware fusion with auditable traces. 

(3)  We develop SSRE as a verifier -aware reasoning scheme over SceneSummary and 

empirically demonstrate improved consistency and reduced hallucinations on multi -sensor 

benchmarks and driving QA tasks. 

The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews related work. Section 3 

formalizes the task definition. Section 4 details the proposed method, including the multi -agent 

perception layer, the ICA module, and the SSRE workflow. Section 5 presents experimental 

results and discussion. Section 6 concludes the paper and outlines future directions. 

2. Related work 

Autonomous driving research is gradually extending from perception fusion and decision 

learning to cognition -level reasoning and semantic validation in open environments. To clarify the 

connections between prior studies and our framework, we categorize related work into three 

threads: (i) BEV -based multimodal perception and fusion, (ii) applications of vision -language 

models (VLMs) and large language models (LLMs) in autonomous driving, and (iii) verifiable 

neuro -symbolic reasoning with formal safety constraints. These threads correspond to the key 

components of our approach —an information coordination bridge, a layered neuro -symbolic 

architecture, and a SceneSummary -Driven Reasoning Engine (SSRE). 

2.1 BEV -based  multimodal  perception and  fusion 

Multimodal perception is a cornerstone of autonomous driving, aiming to fuse heterogeneous 

sensor observations into a unified spatial representation that supports consistent environment 

understanding. BEVFusion  (Z. Liu, et al., 2023 ) pioneered feature -level alignment in the 

bird’s -eye -view (BEV) space, effectively mitigating geometric discrepancies across sensors. 

Subsequent methods such as BEVDepth  (Y. Li, et al., 2023 ) and BEVFormer  (Z. Li, et al., 2024 )introduced depth -aware modeling and temporal attention to enhance spatiotemporal consistency 

and robustness. More recent approaches, including PolarFormer  (Jiang, et al., 2023 ), FB -BEV  (Z. 

Li, et al., 2023 ), and TransFusion  (Bai, et al., 2022 ), further leverage Transformer -based designs to 

optimize cross -modal semantics, consolidating BEV as a prevailing representation for 

multi -sensor fusion.  Complementary to these BEV -centric pipelines, strong modality -specific 

baselines (e.g., CenterPoint  (Yin, et al., 2021 ) for LiDAR and RoPETR  (Ji, et al., 2025 ) for 

multi -view cameras) are often reported to contextualize the performance limits of each sensor 

stream.  Recent end -to -end camera –LiDAR fusion detectors, such as Fully Sparse Fusion (FSF)  (Y. 

Li, et al., 2024 ), GraphBEV  (Song, et al., 2024 ) and  HS -Fusion  (Tang, et al., 2024 ), further 

investigate sparse cross -modal interaction and robust BEV feature alignment under challenging 

sensor discrepancies. 

Despite strong performance on standard perception tasks (e.g., 3D object  detection and 

tracking), BEV -based fusion methods often provide limited semantic abstraction and a

task -specific interface to downstream reasoning . Their outputs typically remain at geometric or 

dense -prediction levels (e.g., 3D boxes or segmentation), lacking an interpretable and structured 

semantic interface that can directly support high -level reasoning and planning. Motivated by this 

limitation, our framework introduces an explicit information coordination module that unifies 

coordinates, entities, and attributes across modalities and compiles a structured SceneSummary, 

which serves as a normalized and auditable input to downstream neuro -symbolic reasoning. 

2.2 VLM/LLM  applications in  autonomous  driving 

With the rapid development of VLMs and LLMs, recent studies have explored integrating 

language models into autonomous driving to enhance semantic understanding and provide more 

interpretable decisions  (Yang, et al., 2023 ). Early attempts such as DriveGPT  (X. Huang, et al., 

2024 ) and GPT -Driver  (Mao, et al. ) explicitly model driving intent and scene semantics through 

language, enabling mappings from perceptual inputs to language -conditioned decisions. DriveLM 

(Sima, et al., 2024 ), DriveVLM  (Tian, et al., 2025 ) and Talk2Drive  (Cui, et al., 2024 ) further 

demonstrate the potential of LLMs for natural -language interaction and instruction following, 

allowing systems to articulate driving rationales in human -readable form.  Recent  work also 

combines knowledge graphs with LLMs via RAG to deliver explainable behavior predictions 

(Hussien, et al., 2025 ). At the representation level, Talk2BEV  (Choudhary, et al., 2024 ) augments 

BEV maps with language supervision to support interactive querying and interpretation, indicating 

the value of BEV -grounded language interfaces for driving scene understanding. 

In addition, general -purpose VLMs such as LLaVA  (H. Liu, et al., 2023 ), BLIP -2 (J. Li, et al., 

2023 ), and Flamingo  (Alayrac, et al., 2022 ) have been applied to visual question answering and 

high -level scene description tasks, offering richer semantic supervision signals. Beyond 

single -model usage, there is a growing trend to wrap foundation models into agentic systems. For 

example, DriveAgent  (Hou, et al., 2025 ) combines LLMs with a multi -agent framework to enable 

collaborative reasoning via language, and PlanAgent  (Zheng, et al., 2024 ) targets closed -loop 

motion planning by integrating multimodal LLMs with hierarchical reasoning and reflection 

components. 

However, many pipelines that incorporate language models emphasize language -conditioned 

perception or descriptive reasoning, whereas systematic modeling of semantic consistency and 

verifiability remains limited.  In safety -critical autonomous driving, cross -modal inconsistencies 

can easily propagate into hallucination -prone high -level inferences. Our layered neuro -symbolic architecture addresses this gap by placing an explicit coordination  and  abstraction interface 

between perception and reasoning. It produces a single -source SceneSummary for grounding, and 

SSRE further enforces entity -anchored reasoning and consistency checking to support reliable 

open -domain scene understanding. 

2.3 Verifiable  neuro -symbolic  reasoning and  formal  safety  constraints 

Achieving explainability and safety in complex driving scenes requires reasoning processes 

that are verifiable. A traditional line of work relies on formal verification and model checking to 

certify properties of neural components (e.g., perception networks) and to evaluate system 

behaviors under prescribed assumptions  (Elboher, et al., 2024 ). While such methods offer rigorous 

guarantees, they often depend on static modeling assumptions and can be difficult to adapt to 

dynamic, semantics -rich environments. 

To improve logical consistency and interpretability, researchers have introduced 

neuro -symbolic reasoning frameworks that represent semantic relations using symbolic or 

probabilistic logic. For example, Maene and  De  Raedt  (Maene & De Raedt, 2023 ) study 

soft -unification in deep probabilistic logic, and Choi et al.  (Choi, et al., 2024 ) investigate 

neuro -symbolic video understanding with explicit relational structure. Nevertheless, many of these 

models are developed for relatively generic reasoning settings and are not directly tailored to 

end -to -end autonomous driving cognition. 

With the emergence of LLM reasoning capabilities, explainable driving has also attracted 

increasing attention. DriveGPT4 constructs traceable reasoning paths through language generation 

(Xu, et al., 2024 ), and DriveLM makes dependencies among perception, prediction, and planning 

explicit through graph -structured question answering  (Sima, et al., 2024 ). Although these efforts 

enhance transparency, they do not yet provide a unified mechanism that simultaneously reconciles 

perceptual uncertainty and verifies reasoning outputs against a structured source of truth. 

More recently, research has shifted toward reflective and verifiable reasoning chains. ReAct 

(Yao, et al., 2022 ) and Reflexion  (Shinn, et al., 2023 ) incorporate feedback and self -checking 

mechanisms to support iterative refinement.  Parameshwaran and Wang  (Parameshwaran & Wang, 

2024 ) combine Linear Temporal Logic (LTL) and Signal Temporal Logic (STL) to generate and 

verify safety -compliant trajectories for autonomous vehicles,  and TrustLLM  (Y. Huang, et al., 

2024 ) highlights benchmarks and requirements for trustworthy reasoning in high -stakes settings. 

Overall, a closed -loop framework that integrates (i) uncertainty reduction and conflict resolution 

in multimodal perception, (ii) logic -consistent entity -anchored reasoning, and (iii) verification and 

revision of reasoning outputs remains largely absent in autonomous driving. 

Motivated by this gap, we propose a SceneSummary -Driven Reasoning Engine (SSRE) that 

couples  neural semantic abstraction with symbolic consistency verification. By combining a 

verifiable reasoning chain with an introspective verification loop, SSRE enables closed -loop 

control from semantic understanding to reasoning validation, improving reliability and safety 

interpretability for autonomous driving scene understanding. 

Table 1 summarizes key capability dimensions relevant to reliable scene understanding, 

including whether a method aggregates multiple sources, explicitly resolves conflicts, anchors 

reasoning to entities, performs self -reflection, and adopts an external verifier. Representative BEV 

fusion methods (e.g., BEVFusion and TransFusion) leverage multi -source sensing but do not 

explicitly reconcile semantic conflicts or verify reasoning outputs. Agent -based approaches (e.g., 

DriveAgent) partially address multi -sour ce coordination, yet they often lack verification mechanisms. In contrast, our approach is designed to make conflict resolution and verification 

explicit at the interface and reasoning levels, enabling more auditable and reliable open -domain 

scene understanding.                                  

> Table 1 .Comparison of the proposed method with representative approaches ( ✔= Yes, ✖= No)
> Method Multi -Fact
> Source
> Explicit Conflict
> Resolution
> Entity
> Anchoring Self -Reflection External
> Verifier
> BEVFusion ✔✖✖✖✖
> TransFusion ✔✖✖✖✖
> DriveAgent ✔✔✔✖✖
> DriveVLM ✖✖✔✖✖
> Ours (InfoCoordiBridge )✔✔✔✔✔

3. Task defin ition 

We study reliable open -world scene understanding for autonomous driving. Given 

synchronized  multimodal  sensor observations, the goal is to produce (i) a globally consistent, 

provenance -aware world state that can serve as a single source of truth, and (ii) a high -level 

decision with a traceable justification grounded in that world state. To enable an auditable 

perception -to -reasoning pipeline, we decompose the task into three hierarchical sub -tasks: 

multi -agent perception, information coordination and abstraction, and SceneSummary -driven 

reasoning. Each sub -task outputs a well -typed artifact that is consumed by the subsequent stage. 

3.1 Multi -agent  perception 

Let  

, , ,cam lidar radar 

X x x x=  denote synchronized raw sensor data at a timestamp. The 

multi -agent perception layer comprises K specialized perception agents   

> 1
> Kkk

 

> =

. Each agent may 

consume a single modality or a  multimodal  subset kX X , and produces a pair of outputs: a 

structured fact set and an optional natural -language synopsis, ( ) ( )

, , 1, .k k k kF A x k K

= = 

(1)

Here kF is a machine -readable structured fact set serialized as JSON (e.g., entity detections 

with attributes following a unified schema), and kA is an agent -specific natural -language synopsis 

generated by an embedded lightweight language model to summarize modality -unique cues. The 

agent design and the unified output interface are detailed in Section 4.1. 

3.2 Information  coordination and  abstraction 

Given the collection of structured fact s 

> 1

F Kk k

F =

= , the Information Coordination and 

Abstraction (ICA) module deterministically compiles a globally consistent world state S , termed 

SceneSummary (Section 4. 2). ICA performs cross -sensor coordinate normalization, hierarchical 

entity alignment, and attribute -level fusion/conflict resolution. At an abstract level, this 

coordination process can be viewed as minimizing the weighted discrepancy between a candidate 

world state and the agent -provided facts, ( )

# ( )

# ( )

> 1

arg min ,    

> KkkkkSk

S d T F g S



> =

= 



(2)

Here ( ) 

> k

T  denotes the coordinate transformation that maps agent k ’s facts into a common 

ego/BEV frame, ( )

,d    is a distance metric over entities and attributes, k

 is a dynamic reliability 

weight encoding modality priors, confidence, uncertainty, and cross -source consistency, and ( ) 

> kgS

projects a candidate world state into the comparable representation space of agent k .

Importantly, ICA consumes only the structured facts kF for numeric coordination; the 

natural -language synopses kA are not used for alignment or fusion. 

The output SceneSummary      

> 1
> Njj
> Se=
> =

is a typed list of fused entities. For each entity je ,

continuous attributes (e.g., position and velocity) are fused via reliability -weighted estimation 

(Eqs. (15) –(16)); correlated -source fusion uses covariance intersection when needed (Eq. (17)); 

categorical attributes (e.g., class) are fused via weighted voting (Eq. (18)); and ambiguous 

attributes are flagged by consistency gates (Eq. (19)) (Section 4.2). In addition to state estimates, 

the SceneSummary records provenance (sensor sources and fusion decisions) and uncertainty 

indicators, enabling it to serve as a single, auditable source of truth for downstream reasoning. 

3.3 SceneSummary -driven  reasoning 

Given the coordinated world state S produced by ICA, an optional user query Q , and optional 

auxiliary synopses   

> 1
> Kkk

A A =

= , the SceneSummary -Driven Reasoning Engine (SSRE) generates 

high -level decisions and explanations, ( ) ( )

, , ,D N S Q A = 

(3)

The structured decision D is serialized as JSON (e.g.,  recommended_action , confidence , and 

supporting_entity_ids ), and the natural -language justification N must ground its factual claims by 

explicitly referencing entities in S . SSRE is implemented as a constrained chain -of -prompt 

workflow with an introspective verification loop (Algorithm 1  in  Section 4. 3), which verifies and 

revises draft outputs against S before emitting the final decision and justificatio n. 

4. Method   

> Figure 2. Architecture of InfoCoordiBridge: multi -agent perception, ICA -based coordination, and
> SceneSummary -driven reasoning (SSRE).

We propose  InfoCoordiBridge , a BEV -centric neuro -symbolic architecture for reliable 

open -world autonomous driving scene understanding. The design goal is to couple (i) rich neural 

perception from heterogeneous sensors with (ii) deterministic symbolic coordination, so that downstream reasoning operates on a globally consistent and auditable world state rather than on 

redundant or conflicting perception logs. 

As illustrated in Fig ure  2, the architecture consists of three layers. First, a multi -agent 

perception layer extracts complementary evidence from different sensing modalities and outputs a 

unified, typed interface. Second, an Information Coordination and Abstraction (ICA) layer 

compiles multi -source perception facts into a single, conflict -resolved world state, termed 

SceneSummary. Third, a SceneSummary -Driven Reasoning Engine (SSRE) performs high -level 

reasoning and decision making under explicit verifiability constraints, producing both a structured 

decision and a grounded natural -language justification. 

The remainder of this section details each component. Section 4.1 describes the multi -agent 

perception module, including the unified output schema and synopsis protocol; Section 4.2 

presents the Information Coordination and Abstraction (ICA) module; and Section 4.3 describes 

the SceneSummary -Driven Reasoning Engine (SSRE). 

4.1  Multi -agent  perception module 

The multi -agent perception module is designed to exploit sensor complementarity while 

providing a disciplined interface for downstream coordination and reasoning. Instead of forcing a 

single monolithic model to infer all properties, we deploy multiple specialized agents —one 

multi -modal BEV fusion agent and several single -modal agents —to extract modality -unique 

evidence with minimal redundancy. Each agent outputs (i) structured, machine -readable facts kF

in a unified JSON schema and (ii) a concise natural -language synopsis kA that emphasizes the 

agent’s distinctive contribution. 

Notably, the structured facts kF are the only inputs used for numeric alignment and fusion in 

ICA, whereas the synopses kA serve as optional auxiliary context for SSRE (e.g., for compact 

semantic cues that are difficult to encode as fields). This separation ensures that cross -sensor 

coordination remains deterministic and auditable, while high -level reasoning can still benefit from 

modality -specific semantics in a controlled manner. 

Table 2 summarizes the four agents used in our implementation: a BEVFusion agent for 

global BEV -space fusion, a camera agent for appearance -centric semantics, a LiDAR agent for 

accurate 3D geometry, and a radar agent for velocity -centric dynamics.    

> Table 2.Focus, core methods, and outputs of each perception agent. Each agent provides structured JSON facts kF
> and an optional synopsis kA.

Agent  Focus & Core Methods  Outputs           

> BEVFusion
> Agent
> Global BEV geometric –semantic fusion;
> BEVFusion framework kF
> :JSON for structured global scene elements; kA
> :natural -language summary of the global scene
> Camera
> Perception Agent
> Appearance & category semantics;
> object detection + scene -specific VLM
> (InsightGPT) kF
> :JSON for detected objects ;kA
> :semantic description and risk summary
> LiDAR
> Perception Agent
> Accurate 3D geometry & localization;
> 3D object detection on point clouds
> (CenterPoint) kF
> :JSON for LiDAR obstacle detections ;kA
> :summary of spatial layout
> Radar Perception
> Agent
> Radial velocity & hard -to -see dynamics;
> Density -based clustering (DBSCAN) kF
> :JSON for radar detections; kA
> :description of motion trends of dynamic objects

4.1.1  BEVFusion  agent 

The BEVFusion agent provides a global BEV -space representation by fusing multi -view 

camera features with LiDAR geometry. Following BEVFusion  (Z. Liu, et al., 2023 ), it aligns 

heterogeneous sensor evidence in a common BEV/ego frame and outputs object -level hypotheses 

that are already geometrically consistent across the fused modalities. In addition, the agent 

produces a concise synopsis describing the global traffic layout, which is later used as auxiliary 

context for SSRE. 

To remain consistent with our experimental focus, the BEVFusion agent primarily 

contributes object -centric facts (e.g., positions, sizes, headings, classes, and confidences). If 

additional static layout cues are available (e.g., coarse BEV semantics), they are treated as 

optional context rather than as mandatory outputs. 

4.1.2  Camera  perception  agent 

The camera agent focuses on appearance -centric semantics that are difficult to recover 

reliably from geometry alone, such as fine -grained categories and visual attributes. It first extracts 

image -space object hypotheses using an off -the -shelf detector, and then uses a traffic -scene 

vision -language model  (Liu, et al., 2025 ) to generate a compact synopsis that highlights salient 

semantic cues (e.g., object type/attributes and risk -related observations). 

For consistency with ICA, the camera agent reports structured facts in a unified schema 

(including local IDs, class probabilities/confidence, and optional depth/scale cues when available). 

The lifting from image space to the ego/BEV frame and the subsequent cross -sensor association 

are handled by ICA (Section 4. 2), which avoids embedding non -deterministic geometry heuristics 

into the agent itself. 

4.1.3  LiDAR  perception  agent 

The LiDAR agent is responsible for accurate 3D geometry and localization. It applies a 

point -cloud 3D detector (CenterPoint  (Yin, et al., 2021 )) to produce precise ego -frame object 

hypotheses, including 3D centers, dimensions, headings, motion attributes (when available), and 

confidence scores. These structured facts provide high -quality geometric anchors for subsequent 

entity alignment and attribute fusion in ICA. 

In parallel, the agent produces a short synopsis that summarizes the spatial layout and salient 

obstacles (e.g., closest leading vehicles or vulnerable road users), complementing the camera 

agent’s appearance -centric cues. 

4.1.4  Radar  perception  agent 

The radar agent specializes in velocity -centric dynamics and provides redundancy under poor 

visibility  (L. Wang, et al., 2026 ). It clusters radar returns using a lightweight density -based method 

(DBSCAN) and estimates per -cluster radial Doppler velocity together with a representative 

position. The resulting structured facts encode motion evidence that is often hard to obtain reliably 

from cameras alone and can complement LiDAR in adverse conditions. 

Since radar measurements are naturally expressed in radar coordinates (range/azimuth/radial 

velocity), ICA performs the deterministic coordinate normalization into the ego/BEV frame before 

entity association and attribute fusion (Section 4. 2.1). The radar synopsis emphasizes motion 

trends (e.g., approaching or receding targets) and is used as auxiliary context for SSRE when needed. 

Overall, the multi -agent perception module provides complementary, typed evidence while 

keeping the interface compact and coordination -friendly. By separating structured facts (for 

deterministic coordination) from natural -language synopses (for auxiliary semantics), it supplies 

ICA and SSRE with consistent inputs and reduces the burden of reasoning over raw, redundant, 

and potentially contradictory perception outputs. 

4.2 Information  coordination and  abstraction module  

> Figure 3. Information Coordination and Abstraction (ICA) pipeline: compiling uncoordinated multi -agent
> perception evidence into a conflict -resolved, provenance -aware SceneSummary.

The Information Coordination and Abstraction (ICA) module addresses semantic 

inconsistency that naturally arises when heterogeneous perception agents report overlapping, 

incomplete, or conflicting observations. Given the structured facts   

> 1
> Kkk

F = (JSON ) produced by the 

multi -agent perception layer, ICA deterministically compiles them into a globally consistent 

world -state representation S (SceneSummary) that serves as the single source of truth for 

downstream reasoning. To maximize reliability and auditability, ICA performs coordinate 

alignment and multi -source fusion using rule -based and uncertainty -aware operations, while 

reserving the large language model for high -level reasoning rather than low -level data 

reconciliation.  Figure  3 illustrates an abstracted end -to -end view of ICA. Starting from uncoordinated multi -agent outputs (duplicates, conflicts, and misses), ICA sequentially performs (i) 

cross -sensor coordinate normalization and entity alignment, (ii) attribute -level fusion and conflict 

resolution, and (iii) deterministic structured -summary generation, yielding a compact and 

provenance -aware SceneSummary for subsequent SSRE reasoning. 

4.2.1  Cross -sensor  coordinate  normalization and  entity  alignment 

Since raw observations are reported in sensor -specific coordinate systems, ICA first maps all 

geometry -bearing detections (LiDAR/radar and BEVFusion outputs) into a unified ego -centric 

BEV reference. Camera detections remain in the image plane and are linked to the BEV world 

state through projection -based association, rather than depth -based back -projection.  Let kp be a 

point (or object center) in sensor frame k . Its coordinate in the ego frame is obtained by the 

calibrated extrinsics: ( )   

> ego kego kego k

= +R .p p t

(4)

For camera detections, ICA does not assume per -pixel or per -box depth availability. Instead, 

camera observations remain in the image plane. During Stage -3 association, ICA projects each 3D 

seed entity (from LiDAR/BEVFusion/radar -fused geometry) into the camera view using calibrated 

intrinsics K and extrinsics ( )    

> ego cam ego cam 

+ tR :( )

# ( )  

> ego cam ego gca ome

 

> 

+= p ,tu K R 

(5)

where  

# ( )

#  

x y z x z y z

=, , / , / 

> 

denotes perspective division. The projected 2D footprint jb of a 

3D box is obtained by projecting its 3D corners and taking the axis -aligned bounding rectangle. 

Camera boxes cam ib are matched to jb by IoU  and class compatibility (Hungarian assignment). 

Matched camera observations contribute appearance -level semantics (e.g., color and fine -grained 

type) while the BEV geometry remains anchored to the 3D seeds. 

For radar targets measured by range r , azimuth  and radial velocity rad v , ICA converts them 

to Cartesian coordinates, maps them to the ego frame, and approximates the BEV velocity 

direction by projecting the line -of -sight onto the BEV plane:  

> 2

( )cos , sin , 0 , , ,R ( )        

> ego rad rad ego rad bev ego ra bev ego rad be drad ego rad v

r r v

  

> 

 −= = +   −

p op p p t v p o

> 

(6)

where ( ) 

   projects a 3D point onto the BEV plane and vrad be 

o denotes the radar origin in the 

ego -BEV coordinates. If the denominator is close to zero, ICA uses a minimum -norm fallback or 

skips the velocity vector to avoid numerical instability. 

After normalization, ICA performs hierarchical entity alignment to merge detections that 

correspond to the same physical object. A spatial index (BEV grid or KD -tree) is built over 

ego -frame centers to prune candidate associations. For a detection i , we define its candidate 

neighborhood under a gating radius g

r as : 

> 2

( ) | .i j gi j r= − p p

(7)

The pairwise distance metric prioritizes Mahalanobis distance when a covariance estimate is 

available; otherwise Euclidean distance is used: ( ) ( ) ( )( )

> 12

, , ., , , i j

covariance known d i j otherwise 

> −

   =  = −

p p p p pp

> 

(8)A composite matching cost further penalizes class mismatch and size disagreement under a 

distance gate dT :( ) ( )

> 2

, s s , . . , .ij cls i j size i j dC d i j c c s t d i j T

= +  + −    

(9)

At each stage, ICA solves a linear assignment problem via the Hungarian algorithm:  

1 1 0 1 ij ij ij ij ij i j j i

C X s t X X X    X

min . . , , , . 

(10 )

Unmatched LiDAR/radar/BEV detections are preserved as single -source BEV entities with 

explicit provenance tags. Unmatched 2D camera detections are retained as image -only semantic 

observations and are not exported as standalone BEV entities unless a geometry -bearing estimate 

(e.g., a camera -only 3D detector) is available. 

Following the hierarchical strategy, ICA progressively fuses four agent streams: (1) 

LiDAR -BEVFusion matching establishes geometry -seed entities; (2) radar detections are attached 

to seeds with an additional velocity -consistency constraint; and (3)  camera 2D detections are 

finally linked to BEV seeds by matching each 2D box to the 2D projection of a 3D seed 

(IoU -based cost with class -compatibility constraints), thereby enriching entities with 

appearance -level semantics without requiring camera depth.  This staged design ensures that 

geometric consistency is established first, while modality -specific attributes are integrated only 

when association confidence is sufficient. 

4.2.2  Conflict  checking and  attribute  fusion 

After entity association, each fused entity may contain multiple observations for the same 

attribute (e.g., position, velocity, class) from different sources. ICA resolves attribute -level 

conflicts by weighted evidence fusion, where the unnormalized weight of source k for attribute 

is: ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) .k k k kk kw m r q u

> 

=   

(11 )

The normalized weight is computed as: ( )( )( ) .kkkk

ww w

> 

= 





(12 )

Here ( )

> k

m 

> 

is a modality –attribute prior (e.g., LiDAR for geometry, radar for velocity, 

camera/BEVFusion for class), kr is a historical reliability score updated by an exponential moving 

average ,kq denotes the current detection confidence, ( )

> k

u 

> 

quantifies uncertainty (from covariance 

when available, or a diagonal approximation from TTA/MC -Dropout), and ( )

> k
> 

 is a cross -modal 

consistency factor  with respect to  the current seed estimate. 

The reliable term kr is updated as: ( ) ( ) ( ) ( )  

> 1

1t t tk k kr r s



> −

= + − ,

(13 )

where ( ) 

#  

1 0 5 0 tks  , . ,  denotes the  pass/suspicious/veto  score  at frame t , computed by  applying the 

residual gate in Section 4.2.1 with the current seed estimate ( )

x

， :( ) ( )

# ( ) 

> ()

# ( )   

> ()()

# ( )

# ( )  

> 1
> kkk
> 



> −

= − −  −( ) exp x x x x

> 

(14 )

For continuous attributes, ICA applies an information -weighted least -squares fusion: ( ) ( ) ( )

# ( )   

> ()()

# ( )       

> ()
> 111
> kkkkkkk

w w 

> −−−

   =        

#  x x ,



(15 )with  the fused covariance ( ) ( ) ( )

# ( ) 

> 11
> kkk

w

> −−

  =   

#  .



(16 )

To avoid over -confidence due to correlated sources (e.g., BEVFusion vs. its constituent 

LiDAR/camera streams), ICA uses Covariance Intersection (CI) when source lineage indicates 

correlation: ( ) ( ) ( )( ) ( ) ( )( )

# ( )    

> 11111

1 1CI b CI CI a b b

> 

    

> −−−−−

 =  + −  =   + − , x x x ,

(17 )

where ( )

0 1 

 , is chosen by a lightweight heuristic (defaulting to balanced fusion and optionally 

biased toward the lower -residual / higher -trust estimate). 

For categorical attributes (e.g., object class), ICA uses weighted voting: ( ) ( ) ( ) ( )   

> cls kkck

Conf c P c c Conf c

= = , arg max .



(18 )

An ambiguity rule marks an attribute as uncertain when the class confidence is low or when 

any residual violates a 2

 gate under the fused covariance: ( ) 

# ( )

# ( ) ( )

# ( )    

> 12
> cls kkcd

ambiguous Conf c

> 



> −

   −  −  ,max x x x x .

 

(19 )

4.2.3  Deterministic  structured  summary  generation 

Based on the fused entity set, ICA produces the final structured SceneSummary in a fully 

deterministic manner. Specifically, each entity is exported as a normalized record containing: a 

global entity ID, BEV position and velocity estimates (with uncertainty when available), class 

label and confidence, size, sensor provenance, fusion lineage, and ambiguity flags. The resulting 

SceneSummary is directly consumable by the central reasoning engine (SSRE) and enables 

transparent tracing from raw multi -agent evidence to the final coordinated world model. 

Overall, the ICA module converts heterogeneous multi -agent perception outputs into a 

compact, globally consistent SceneSummary, providing a reliable factual substrate for downstream 

neuro -symbolic reasoning.  A compact pseudocode of the full ICA pipeline is provided in 

Appendix A  (A lgorithm  A.1). 

4.3 SceneSummary -driven  reasoning  engine (SSRE) 

The SceneSummary -Driven Reasoning Engine (SSRE) is designed to ensure that high -level 

driving reasoning is grounded on a consistent and auditable factual substrate. In contrast to 

conventional LLM -based pipelines that reason directly over raw, heterogeneous perception 

outputs, SSRE operates on a single, coordinated world -state representation S (SceneSummary )

produced by the Information Coordination and Abstraction (ICA) module (Section 4.2). This 

design explicitly decouples (i) uncertainty -prone multi -sensor reconciliation from (ii) 

open -domain semantic reasoning, thereby reducing the risk of hallucinated entities and 

untraceable justifications in safety -critical scenarios. 

Existing LLM reasoning paradigms are effective at eliciting multi -step reasoning but 

typically assume that the input evidence is self -consistent. For example, Chain -of -Thought 

prompting encourages stepwise inference  (Wei, et al., 2022 ), yet it remains vulnerable when the 

prompt contains ambiguous or contradictory claims. Similarly, agentic frameworks that interleave 

reasoning with actions (e.g., external tool calls) are not naturally aligned with autonomous driving, where trial -and -error interactions can be prohibitively costly  (Yao, et al., 2022 ). Moreover, recent 

efforts toward interpretable driving decisions often provide reasoning traces but do not 

systematically verify whether each step is consistent with the perceived world state. 

SSRE instantiates a symbolically grounded reasoning paradigm: it treats the coordinated 

SceneSummary S as the single source of truth and enforces that all factual claims in the decision 

and justification are traceable to entities and attributes in S . Importantly, our  coordination design 

does not rely on depth -based back -projection for camera observations ; appearance semantics 

extracted from camera views are attached to BEV entities through projection -based association 

inside ICA, and SSRE only consumes the resulting BEV -anchored SceneSummary. 

4.3.1  Interface  specification 

SSRE interacts with the rest of the system through a standardized interface. The inputs 

include: (i) an optional user query Q in natural language, (ii) the coordinated SceneSummary S

generated by ICA, and (iii) an optional auxiliary perception synopsis A (natural -language 

summaries from the perception agents). The outputs follow a dual -stream design: 

(1)  StructuredDecision final D (JSON), containing fields such as  recommended_action ,

confidence , and  supporting_entity_ids ;

(2)  NaturalLanguageJustification final N , providing an audit -friendly explanation whose 

factual statements are explicitly anchored to entity IDs in S .

To preserve the “single -source -of -truth” principle, SSRE treats A as non -binding context: it 

may improve readability or provide narrative cues, but it must not introduce new entities, numeric 

attributes, or relations that are absent from S . Any inconsistency between A and S is resolved in 

favor of S , and such inconsistencies are explicitly handled by the verification stage described 

below.  All prompt specifications are provided in Appendix  B. 

Figure  4 illustrates the schema -level SSRE workflow. SSRE takes ( )

Q S A , , as inputs and 

produces an entity -anchored decision final D and justification final N via a four -stage constrained 

prompting pipeline: Structured Scene Parsing (SSP), Systematic Risk Assessment (SRA), 

Verifiable Reasoning Chain Generation (VRCG), and Introspective Verification Loop (IVL).   

> Figure 4.SceneSummary -Driven Reasoning Engine (SSRE): a four -stage verifier -aware reasoning workflow
> grounded on SceneSummary .

4.3.2  Four -stage  verifiable  reasoning  workflow 

SSRE follows a four -stage constrained prompting workflow that proceeds sequentially 

through Structured Scene Parsing (SSP), Systematic Risk Assessment (SRA), Verifiable 

Reasoning Chain Generation (VRCG), and the Introspective Verification Loop (IVL). All factual 

claims are anchored to SceneSummary entities and are iteratively verified before producing the 

final decision and justification (Algorithm 1). 

Algorithm 1: Chain -of -Prompt Reasoning in SSRE 

Input s:

SceneSummary S (JSON)  // coordinated world state (single source of truth) 

UserQuery Q // natural -language query/instruction 

AuxDescriptions A (optional)  // auxiliary agent synopses (non -binding context) k_max 

// maximum IVL iterations 0 5 gamma = .

// confidence penalty if not fully verified 

Output s:

StructuredDecision D final _ //  JSON (recommended_action, confidence, supporting_entity_ids, ...) 

NaturalLanguageJustification N final _ //  final grounded justification text paired with D_final 

Procedure: 

1: M ← LLM.Generate( T parse S _ , )

//  SSP: constrained parsing of S into a standardized intermediate representation 

2: L risk _ ← LLM.Generate( T risk M_ , )

//  SRA: proactive risk identification and prioritization grounded in M

3: ( )

D N , ← LLM.Generate( ( )Q, M, L_risk, A T reason _ , )

//  VRCG: draft decision + entity -anchored justification 

//  Requirement: every factual claim in N cites entity IDs from S M/

4: verified  ← false  //  initialize the verification status for the IVL stage 

5: for k = 1 to k_max do  //  run a bounded verify 

→revise loop to ensure termination 

6: V ← LLM.Generate( ( )

T verify S D N _ , , , )

// V is a JSON object with fields:  

V .verdict Consistent Minor Major V .comment  , , ,

7: if V .verdict  == "Consistent" then 

8: verified  ← true 

9: break 

10: end if 

11: ( )

D N , ← LLM. Generate( ( )

T revision S V D N _ , , , , )

//  revise only the parts flagged by V; do not introduce new entities/attributes 

12: end for 

13: D final _ ←D //  finalize the structured decision using the last revised draft 

14: N final _ ←N //  finalize the natural -language justification using the last revised draft 

15: if verified == false then  //  handle the case where full consistency is not achieved within k_max 

16: D final _ .confidence  ← gamma *  D_final.confidence 

17: D final _ .flags.add("unverified_after_k_max") 

18: end if 

19: return ( D final _ ,N final _ ) //  output the final decision and its grounded justification 4.3.3  Stage  descriptions 

Structured Scene Parsing (SSP).  SSP uses a constrained template T parse _ to convert the 

SceneSummary  JSON into a standardized intermediate representation M . Although S is already 

structured, directly prompting an LLM with raw JSON may lead to field omissions or 

misinterpretations. SSP therefore normalizes the scene into a consistent format that explicitly lists 

entities, attributes, and relations, which reduces degrees of freedom in subsequent generation. In 

implementation, we set conservative decoding (e.g., low temperature) to improve stability. 

Systematic Risk Assessment (SRA).  Before answering the user query, SSRE forces an 

explicit risk assessment step using template T risk _ . Based on M , the model enumerates potential 

hazards and outputs a ranked risk list L risk _ according to severity and urgency. This design 

injects safety considerations as a first -class constraint rather than an afterthought, aligning the 

reasoning process with safety -critical decision making. 

Verifiable Reasoning Chain Generation (VRCG).  VRCG is the core decision generation 

stage. Using template T reason _ , SSRE produces a draft decision D (JSON) and a draft 

justification N in response to Q while conditioning on M and L risk _ . Crucially, the prompt 

enforces entity anchoring: every factual statement about the scene must cite the corresponding 

entity ID, and the decision must include supporting_entity_ids that directly justify the 

recommended action. This constraint makes the reasoning traceable and prepares it for subsequent 

verification. 

Introspective Verification Loop (IVL).  IVL treats the LLM as a consistency verifier using 

template T verify _ . Given ( )  

> S D N ,,

, the verifier checks whether any claim in the draft contradicts 

the ground -truth SceneSummary. If inconsistencies are found, SSRE triggers a revision step with T revision _

to update both the decision JSON and the justification while preserving all correct 

content. The loop runs for at most max k iterations. If full consistency is not achieved, SSRE still 

returns the latest draft but applies a confidence penalty and explicitly flags the output as not fully 

verified. 

Overall, SSRE redefines the central LLM component as a SceneSummary -driven, 

verifier -aware reasoning engine. By grounding all reasoning on a coordinated world model and 

embedding risk -first and verification steps into the inference loop, SSRE provides traceable 

decisions and explanations that are substantially more robust to noisy evidence and misleading 

premises than unconstrained open -ended prompting. 

5. Experiment al  results and analysis 

This section describes the experimental setup used to evaluate InfoCoordiBridge , the 

proposed neuro -symbolic architecture, in which information coordination serves as the bridge 

between perception and reasoning. Specifically, we evaluate the complete pipeline from 

perception to reasoning, including multimodal 3D object detection, scene consistency analysis, 

open -domain question answering about driving scenes, and high level decision reasoning using the 

Information Coordination and Abstraction (ICA) module and the SceneSummary -Driven 

Reasoning Engine (SSRE). 5.1  Experiment al  setup 

5.1.1 Datasets 

We conduct experiments on three public benchmarks —nuScenes  (Caesar, et al., 2020 ),

NuScenes -QA  (Qian, et al., 2024 ), and the Waymo Open Dataset  (Sun, et al., 2020 )—to cover 

both multimodal perception and language -centric reasoning tasks. Specifically, nuScenes provides 

synchronized multi -sensor observations (6 surround cameras, 1 LiDAR, and 5 radars) with rich 

3D annotations and diverse urban driving conditions, serving as the primary benchmark for 

evaluating multimodal perception performance. Furthermore, NuScenes -QA is built upon 

nuScenes 3D annotations and provides large -scale question –answer pairs (e.g., object attributes, 

spatial relations, risks, and decisions) together with scene semantic graphs; we treat the provided 

semantic graph as an oracle “ideal scene summary” to assess how well our generated 

SceneSummary matches the underlying scene semantics. 

To examine cross -dataset robustness, we additionally use the Waymo Open Dataset, which 

contains dense annotations and a multi -sensor setup with high -resolution cameras and LiDAR 

(and notably differs from nuScenes by lacking radar), enabling an analysis of how sensor 

completeness affects fusion consistency. Following the conversion rules in Appendix  C, we further 

derive a templated QA benchmark (Waymo -QA) whose task definitions and question styles are 

aligned with NuScenes -QA, so that generalization can be evaluated under comparable QA formats 

in a zero -shot setting. 

5.1.2 Baselines 

For multimodal 3D detection and fusion consistency, we compare single -modality baselines 

(CenterPoint  (Yin, et al., 2021 ) for LiDAR -only and RoPETR  (Ji, et al., 2025 ) for camera -only), 

representative end -to -end camera –LiDAR fusion detectors (BEVFusion  (Z. Liu, et al., 2023 ),

TransFusion  (Bai, et al., 2022 ), FSF  (Fully Sparse Fusion ) (Y. Li, et al., 2024 ), and 

GraphBEV (Song, et al., 2024 )), and our multi -agent detector ensemble followed by ICA -based 

symbolic coordination. We also include an ablation variant without ICA to isolate the contribution 

of the information -coordination bridge to consistency improvements. 

For cross -modal conflict resolution and scene -consistency evaluation, we include Naive 

Fusion and several representative perception -to -LLM pipelines (DriveVLM -style  (Tian, et al., 

2025 ), LLM4Drive -style  (Yang, et al., 2023 ), and DriveGPT4 -style  (Xu, et al., 2024 )). Notably, 

because public implementations of these systems are not fully compatible with our 

scene -consistency I/O constraints, we reproduce their core design ideas under a unified protocol 

and append the suffix “ -style”. Moreover, all baselines that require a text LLM are instantiated 

with the same open -source LLM backbones and evaluated in a zero -shot setting (without 

fine -tuning) to ensure a fair comparison. For open -ended QA and decision reasoning, we further 

compare pure VLM baselines (BLIP -2 (J. Li, et al., 2023 ), LLaVA  (H. Liu, et al., 2023 ),

Qwen 2-VL  (P. Wang, et al., 2024 )), a BEV -based VLM (Talk2BEV -style  (Choudhary, et al., 

2024 )), and planning -style agents (DriveGPT4 -style  (Xu, et al., 2024 ) and PlanAgent -style  (Zheng, 

et al., 2024 )), together with controlled ablations that toggle ICA, SSRE, and the Introspective 

Verification Loop (IVL). 5.1.3 Metrics 

We adopt a multi -dimensional metric suite spanning accuracy, consistency, safety, reliability, 

and efficiency. For detection accuracy, we report mean Average Precision (mAP) and nuScenes 

Detection Score (NDS) on nuScenes, and mAP on Waymo. In addition, to quantify fusion 

consistency, we use Entity Redundancy Rate (ERR; lower is better) and Attribute Consistency 

Rate (ACR; higher is better), where ERR measures how often a physical object is redundantly 

reported after fusion, and ACR measures cross -sensor agreement on key attributes such as class, 

position, and heading. 

For conflict -resolution benchmarking, we report Conflict Resolution Rate (CRR), Missed 

Detection Compensation Rate (MDCR), the average number of hallucinated entities per scene (HE; 

lower is better), and entity -level Precision/Recall/F1 (EP/ER/EF1). For unified -interface analysis, 

we measure answer Accuracy, Hallucination Rate (HR), and inference efficiency using Avg. 

Prompt Length (APL) and Avg. Inference Time (AIT). 

Finally, for open -ended QA and high -level decision reasoning, we evaluate: (i) task -level 

correctness via QA Exact Match (QA EM), Answer F1, and Decision Accuracy (DA); (ii) 

explanation quality via BLEU -4 and ROUGE -L; (iii) safety via Risk Identification F1 (RI F1); and 

(iv) reliability & hallucination via Fact Consistency Pass Rate (FCPR) and Hallucinated Entity 

Mention Rate (HER; lower is better), which assess factual alignment of answers/decisions with the 

SceneSummary and the tendency to mention non -existent entities, respectively. 

5.2  Multimodal 3D  detection  performance and  fusion  consistency  evaluation 

This experiment evaluates whether the proposed Information Coordination and Abstraction 

(ICA) module can fuse multi -sensor 3D detections into a globally consistent BEV world 

representation while maintaining competitive detection accuracy. We compare our “independent 

multi -agent detectors with ICA” pipeline against representative single -modality detectors and 

end -to -end camera –LiDAR fusion baselines under a unified BEV/ego coordinate system. 

We conduct the evaluation on nuScenes as the primary benchmark and additionally test on 

the Waymo Open Dataset to examine cross -dataset robustness under different sensor 

configurations. Notably, nuScenes contains camera, LiDAR, and radar modalities, whereas 

Waymo contains camera and LiDAR only; this modality -completeness difference helps analyze 

how explicit coordination behaves when the number and heterogeneity of sensor sources changes. 

As baselines, we include CenterPoint (LiDAR -only) and RoPETR (camera -only) to 

characterize single -modality performance limits, and we further compare several representative 

end -to -end camera –LiDAR fusion detectors, including TransFusion, BEVFusion, FSF, and 

GraphBEV. For our approach, we report two variants: Ours ( without  ICA), which aggregates 

per -agent detections without explicit cross -sensor coordination, and Ours, which applies ICA to 

perform coordinate normalization, entity association, and attribute fusion before producing the 

final fused detection list. 

We report both detection accuracy metrics and fusion -consistency metrics. For detection 

accuracy, we use the official nuScenes metrics mean Average Precision (mAP) and nuScenes 

Detection Score (NDS), and we use mAP on Waymo. For consistency, we use Entity Redundancy 

Rate (ERR; lower is better), which measures the fraction of duplicated reports for the same 

physical object in the final detection list, and Attribute Consistency Rate (ACR; higher is better), 

which measures cross -sensor agreement on key attribu tes such as class, position, and heading. Therefore, higher mAP/NDS/  ACR and lower ERR indicate better overall performance.                                                                    

> Table 3.Performance and consistency of multimodal 3D detection methods on the nuScenes and Waymo datasets.
> Best results are shown in bold, and second -best results are shown in italics. “L” denotes LiDAR and “C” denotes
> camera; “ –” indicates that ERR/ACR are not applicable for single -modality methods.
> nuScenes Waymo
> Method mAP(%) NDS(%) ERR(%) ACR(%) mAP(%) ERR(%) ACR(%)
> CenterPoint (L -only) 60.3 67.3 --68.4 --
> RoPETR (C -only) 64.8 70.9 --69.7 --
> TransFusion (L+C) 68.9 71.7 18.0 82.0 65.1 10.0 85.0
> BEVFusion (L+C) 70.2 72.9 15.0 85.0 70.0 8.0 90.0
> FSF (L+C) 70.4 72.7 12.0 88.0 70.0 5.0 92.0
> GraphBEV (L+C) 71.7 73.6 10.0 90.0 70.0 5.0 90.0
> Ours (without ICA) 58.0 63.0 25.0 75.0 67.0 30.0 70.0
> Ours 70.9 73.2 0.7 98.0 69.8 1.0 95.0

On  nuScenes, GraphBEV achieves the highest detection accuracy (mAP=71.7%, 

NDS=73.6%). Our method reaches mAP=70.9% and NDS=73.2%, which is within 1 percentage 

point of the strongest end -to -end BEV baselines, indicating that introducing ICA does not 

compromise 3D detection accuracy. On Waymo, several end -to -end fusion baselines reach 

mAP=70.0%; our method attains mAP=69.8%, remaining competitive under cross -dataset 

transfer. 

The consistency metrics highlight the key advantage of symbolic coordination. Without ICA, 

simply aggregating the multi -agent detections yields substantial redundancy and conflicts: on 

nuScenes, Ours ( without  ICA) exhibits ERR=25.0% and ACR=75.0% ; on Waymo, ERR further 

increases to 30.0% and ACR drops to 70.0%, indicating that naïve union of detections produces 

many duplicated boxes and inconsistent attributes. End -to -end fusion baselines partially mitigate 

this issue through feature -level fusion, but still  retain non -negligible redundancy (ERR ≈10 –18% 

on nuScenes and 5 –10% on Waymo) and limited attribute agreement (ACR ≈82 –90% on 

nuScenes and 85 –92% on Waymo). In contrast, our ICA -based method reduces ERR to 0.7% and 

increases ACR to 98.0% on nuScenes; it  also achieves ERR=1.0% and ACR=95.0% on Waymo, 

outperforming all compared approaches on consistency across both benchmarks. 

Notably, comparing nuScenes and Waymo suggests that modality completeness amplifies the 

benefit of explicit coordination. In nuScenes, the presence of additional sensor sources (including 

radar) increases the chance of cross -source redundancy and attribute disagreement, and ICA yields 

the most pronounced gains on ERR/ACR. In Waymo, where the sensor set is smaller (camera  with 

LiDAR), the end -to -end fusion baselines already show improved consistency; nevertheless, ICA 

still further compresses redundancy and improves attribute agreement, indicating that the 

coordination mechanism remains beneficial even when the modality set is reduced. 

Overall, this experiment shows that the ICA module functions as an effective “information 

coordination bridge” between multimodal perception and downstream reasoning: it maintains 

detection accuracy at a level comparable to strong end -to -end fusion baselines while producing a 

substantially more compact and self -consistent fused world representation (low ERR and high 

ACR). This consistency gain is essential for the subsequent SceneSummary -driven 

neuro -symbolic reasoning, where redundant or conflicting entities can directly trigger unreliable 

high -level inferences. 5.3  Cross -modal  conflict  resolution and  scene  consistency  analysis 

This experiment moves beyond the overall detection accuracy reported in Section  5.2 and 

focuses on semantic reliability of multi -sensor fusion. Specifically, we evaluate whether fused 

perception outputs form a self -consistent, contradiction -free scene description, which is essential 

when the downstream reasoning module relies on a single “source of truth” (SceneSummary) 

rather than reconciling noisy evidence on its own. 

We instantiate this evaluation as a scene fact -consistency verification task on NuScenes -QA. 

For each driving scene, a method produces a fused entity set and a scene -level representation. We 

then quantify how effectively cross -modal conflicts are resolved, how many missed entities are 

recovered, and how often hallucinated entities are introduced when LLMs are used in the pipeline. 

We compare several representative fusion and perception -to -LLM paradigms: Naive Fusion 

(direct union of detections without explicit coordination),  Naive Fusion + LLM  (direct prompting 

baseline that asks a text LLM to consolidate the naïvely aggregated multi -source detections into a 

single entity list under the same output schema ), DriveVLM -style, LLM4Drive -style, 

DriveGPT4 -style, and our method (Ours). Furthermore, all baselines that require a text LLM use 

the same open -source LLM backbones and are evaluated in a strict zero -shot setting to ensure fair 

comparison. 

Table  4 reports Conflict Resolution Rate (CRR, %), Missed Detection Compensation Rate 

(MDCR, %), the average number of Hallucinated Entities per scene (HE, lower is better), and 

entity -level Precision/Recall/F1 (EP/ER/EF1, %).  Here, CRR and MDCR are computed with 

respect to an oracle entity set G from the provided NuScenes -QA scene graph, using the same 

one -to -one entity matching operator ( ) 

 as EP/ER/EF1. Specifically,  performs class -consistent 

BEV IoU matching with Hungarian assignment under an IoU threshold  . For each scene s , let s s

C G( ) ( )

denote conflict entities for which at least two input sources yield reports matched to the 

same oracle entity but disagree on key attributes (e.g., class or heading beyond a tolerance), and 

let s sfix C C( ) ( ) denote those whose final fused output yields a single matched entity whose key 

attributes are oracle -consistent. We report Conflict Resolution Rate as a micro -average over the 

evaluation set: ( )

100 

> sfix sss

CCRR C

= 

#    

> ()()

.%

(20 )

Similarly, let s s

M G( ) ( )  denote oracle entities missed by the designated primary detector (the 

BEVFusion agent) under  , and let s scomp M M( ) ( )  denote those recovered by the final fused output. 

We report Missed Detection Compensation Rate as: ( )

100 

> scomp sss

MMDCR M

= 

#    

> ()()

.%

(21 )

EP/ER/EF1 summarize the overall entity quality after fusion, while HE directly captures 

hallucination risks in perception -to -LLM pipelines. Higher is better for CRR, MDCR, EP, ER, and 

EF1; lower is better for HE. Table  4. Cross -Modal Conflict Resolution and Scene Consistency Comparison on NuScenes -QA . Methods with                                              

> the suffix “ -style” are protocol -aligned reproductions under unified I/O constraints. “ –” indicates not applicable for
> Naive Fusion (non -generative union), which does not synthesize entities.
> Method CRR(%) MDCR(%) HE(per -scene) EP(%) ER(%) EF1(%)
> Na ive Fusion 0.0 36.5 -78.2 92.5 84.7
> Naive Fusion +LLM 2.3 37.8 0.9 74.5 79.1 76.7
> DriveVLM -style 1.7 40.5 1.2 76.8 80.3 78.5
> LLM4Drive -style 3.4 38.2 1.4 72.2 77.6 74.8
> DriveGPT4 -style 4.1 39.0 1.6 75.9 82.1 78.9
> Ours 91.7 74.6 0.1 87.3 89.2 88.2

Table  4 shows a clear separation between explicit symbolic coordination and non -coordinated 

baselines. Without an explicit coordination stage, all compared baselines achieve CRR below 5%, 

indicating that most cross -modal contradictions remain unresolved and are directly passed to the 

final scene representation. In contrast, our method reaches CRR=91.7%, demonstrating that the 

ICA -based coordination effectively reconciles duplicated entities and conflicting attributes into a 

single consistent world model. 

Furthermore, our method substantially improves completeness without introducing spurious 

entities. MDCR increases to 74.6%, nearly doubling the range of the baselines (36.5% –40.5%), 

which indicates that the coordinated fusion retains complementary detections and recovers missed 

entities more effectively. At the same time, our method produces almost no hallucinated entities 

(HE=0.1 per scene), whereas perception -to -LLM pipelines without a clean, coordinated world 

model generate 0.9 –1.6 hallucinated entities per scene on average. This result supports the central 

motivation of our architecture: providing a clean, self -consistent SceneSummary prior to 

reasoning is critical to suppress hallucination -prone high -level inference. 

This large margin is expected because CRR and MDCR are coordination -focused metrics 

rather than detection -accuracy metrics: they explicitly test whether a pipeline can (i) identify that 

multiple reports refer to the same physical entity, and (ii) reconcile mutually inconsistent attributes 

into a single, schema -compliant representation. Non -coordinated baselines either keep the raw 

union of multi -source detections (thus preserving contradictions by construction) or rely on an 

LLM to consolidate lists without deterministic geometric association; in practice, such 

consolidation is brittle under dense scenes and noisy cross -sensor discrepancies, often leaving 

conflicts unaligned or discarding complementary evidence. In contrast, ICA performs explicit 

coordinate normalization and entity alignment before any language reasoning, and fuses attributes 

under fixed rules with provenance/uncertainty bookkeeping, which directly targets the failure 

mode measured by CRR/MDCR and prevents contradictions from being propagated downstream. 

Entity -level precision/recall further explain the reliability gap across paradigms. Naive 

Fusion obtains the highest recall (ER=92.5%) by construction because it largely preserves 

single -source detections; however, its precision is limited (EP=78.2%) due to duplicated boxes 

and unresolved attribute conflicts, which lowers the overall EF1. Perception -to -LLM pipelines 

slightly reduce redundancy but remain vulnerable to noisy and contradictory inputs, leading to 

both lower EP/ER and non -negligible hallucinations. In contrast, our method achieves a

substantially better balance (EP=87.3%, ER=89.2%, EF1=88.2%) by explicitly aligning entities 

and fusing attributes during the coordination stage, which removes contradictory duplicates while 

preserving most valid detections. Finally, we provide qualitative visualizations in Section  5.6.1 to illustrate how cross -modal 

conflicts and missed detections are handled in representative nuScenes  scenes, and how these 

corrections translate into improvements in CRR/MDCR/HE (as well as the detection -level 

consistency metrics ERR/ACR in Section  5.2). Overall, this experiment demonstrates that 

inserting an explicit Information Coordination and Abstraction module between perception and 

reasoning yields a more reliable, auditable, and self -consistent scene representation, which forms 

an indispensable foundation for subsequent high -level reasoning and decision making. 

5.4 Impact of the  multi -agent  unified  interface on LLM  reasoning  performance 

This experiment evaluates whether a unified, structured interface between multi -agent 

perception and large language model (LLM) reasoning improves open -domain driving question 

answering under a zero -shot setting. 

The unified interface is instantiated as the output of our Information Coordination and 

Abstraction (ICA) module: a single, globally consistent SceneSummary represented in JSON, 

together with a concise natural -language scene synopsis aggregated from the perception agents. 

Both components are injected into the LLM prompt as plain text, enabling downstream reasoning 

without exposing the model to raw, redundant, or mutually inconsistent perception logs. 

We adopt NuScenes -QA as the benchmark and compare (i) end -to -end vision –language 

models (VLMs) that answer from camera images (BLIP -2, LLaVA, Qwen 2-VL), and (ii) text -only 

LLMs (LLaMA2 -13B, Qwen -14B, GLM -4-9B, DeepSeek -14B). For each text -only LLM, we 

evaluate two prompting conditions: (a) no unified interface, where the prompt contains 

concatenated raw multi -agent detection text (uncoordinated and potentially redundant/conflicting), 

and (b) with unified interface, where the prompt contains the SceneSummary JSON, the scene 

synopsis, and the question. All models are evaluated strictly in a zero -shot manner without 

fine -tuning on NuScenes -QA. 

We report Accuracy and F1 for task correctness, Hallucination Rate (HR) for reliability, and 

Average Prompt Length (APL) / Average Inference Time (AIT) for efficiency. HR measures the 

fraction of answers that mention entities or relations not supported by the scene. APL counts the 

number of text tokens in the prompt and is therefore not applicable to image -conditioned VLM 

baselines.                       

> Table 5.Performance of different methods on the NuScenes -QA subset under the zero -shot setting .
> Method Accuracy (%) F1 HR (%) APL (tokens) AIT (s)
> BLIP -230 0.40 15 -4.7
> LLaVA 35 0.45 20 -3.5
> Qwen 2-VL 40 0.50 15 -4.0
> LLaMA2 -13B (

no unified interface ) 45  0.50  30  ~1000  6.5 

> LLaMA2 -13B (

with unified interface ) 65  0.70  5 ~260  4.0 

> Qwen -14B (

no unified interface ) 50  0.55  25  ~1000  7.0 

> Qwen -14B (

with unified interface ) 75  0.80  5 ~260  4.5 

> GLM -4-9B (

no unified interface ) 30  0.35  35  ~1000  4.0 

> GLM -4-9B (

with unified interface ) 55  0.60  10  ~260  2.5 

> DeepSeek -14B (

no unified interface ) 55  0.60  20  ~1000  6.0 

> DeepSeek -14B (

with unified interface ) 78  0.85  5 ~260  3.5 

Table  5 summarizes the zero -shot results on NuScenes -QA.  Notably, the unified interface consistently improves text -only LLM reasoning across all backbones. Relative to raw detection 

text prompting, Accuracy increases by 20 –25 % (e.g.,  from  45 % to  65 % for LLaMA2 -13B  and 

from  50 % to  75 % for Qwen -14B), while HR drops sharply to 5 –10% (e.g., 30 % to  5% and 35 % to 

10 %). Furthermore, GLM -4-9B with the unified interface (55% Accuracy) surpasses Qwen -14B 

without it (50% Accuracy), indicating that input quality and structure can partially compensate for 

smaller model capacity. 

In contrast, end -to -end VLM baselines remain substantially weaker on this benchmark (30 –

40% Accuracy with 15 –20% HR), which is consistent with their limited ability to perform 

structured 3D/spatial reasoning and multi -view evidence consolidation in complex driving scenes 

when an explicit, typed world state is absent. 

The efficiency results further support the benefit of the interface. By replacing long, 

uncoordinated detection logs (~1000 tokens) with a compact SceneSummary -plus -synopsis 

prompt (~260 tokens), the unified interface reduces APL by approximately 74% (~3.8 ×shorter) 

and yields a 36 –42% reduction in inference latency (AIT) across the evaluated LLMs. 

Overall, these results show that a unified SceneSummary interface functions as an effective 

“information bridge” for LLM -based driving cognition: it improves answer correctness, 

suppresses hallucinations by removing redundancy and cross -modal inconsistency at the interface, 

and reduces computational overhead through prompt compression. 

5.5 Open -world  driving  scene QA and  high -level  decision  reasoning  performance 

This experiment evaluates whether the proposed neuro -symbolic architecture supports 

reliable open -world driving question answering (QA) and safety -critical high -level decision 

reasoning. Specifically, we assess how the Information Coordination and Abstraction (ICA) 

module and the SceneSummary -Driven Reasoning Engine (SSRE) jointly improve task 

correctness, safety awareness, and factual reliability under open -ended natural -language queries. 

Given a scene representation and a user query, the system outputs (i) an answer or a 

recommended action and (ii) a traceable natural -language justification. We consider four question 

types: (1) Relation QA, which queries spatial relations among entities; (2) Dynamic/Status QA, 

which queries motion states and temporal dynamics; (3) Risk Prediction QA, which asks for 

potential hazards and risk explanations; and (4) Decision QA, which requires a high -level driving 

suggestion under traffic -rule constraints (e.g., whether to slow down or stop). 

We mainly evaluate on NuScenes -QA. Furthermore, to test cross -dataset robustness, we 

convert the Waymo Open Dataset into a NuScenes -QA -style benchmark (Waymo -QA) using 

aligned templates (see the conversion templates in the appendix  C). This design keeps task 

definitions consistent across datasets, enabling a controlled assessment of both in -domain 

performance and transfer robustness. 

Table  6 summarizes the compared methods. We include (A1 –A3) pure vision -language 

models (BLIP -2, LLaVA, Qwen 2-VL) that answer directly from multi -view images; (A4) a 

BEV -based VLM baseline (Talk2BEV -style); (B1 –B2) multimodal planning -style agents 

(DriveGPT4 -style and PlanAgent -style); and (C1 –C5) our variants that isolate the contribution of 

each architectural component. In particular, C2 applies ICA to produce a clean SceneSummary 

followed by a single -stage chain -of -thought, C3 runs the full SSRE workflow on a noisy 

pseudo -SceneSummary  without ICA, C5 removes the Introspective Verification Loop (IVL), and 

C4 is the full ICA+SSRE system. For fairness, all methods requiring a text LLM are evaluated in a 

zero -fine -tuning setting using the same open -source LLM family. Table  6. Compared methods in Experiment  5.5  (w/o = without) .

ID  Method  Paradigm / Type  Brief description 

A1  BLIP -2 Pure VLM 

baseline 

Pre -trained vision  – language model answering questions 

directly from multi -view camera images and text. 

A2  LLaVA  Pure VLM 

baseline 

Instruction -tuned VLM performing open -ended VQA on 

images without explicit BEV or 3D structure. 

A3  Qwen 2-VL  Pure VLM 

baseline 

Bilingual VLM used as a generic VQA backbone on camera 

images and text questions. 

A4  Talk2BEV -style  BEV -based VLM  BEV -based VQA baseline that feeds rendered BEV semantic 

maps and questions into a general VLM. 

B1  DriveGPT4 -style  End -to -end V -L

driving agent 

End -to -end vision –language driving agent generating scene 

descriptions and high -level driving suggestions. 

B2  PlanAgent -style  Structured 

planning agent 

Planning agent using structured environment descriptions with 

hierarchical chain -of -thought and a single reflection step. 

C1  Ours (Raw -Text)  LLM agent w/o 

ICA or SSRE 

LLM agent reasoning on concatenated raw detection logs and 

textual summaries without information coordination or SSRE. 

C2  Ours (w/o SSRE)  ICA -only ablation  Applies the ICA module to build a clean SceneSummary , then 

runs a single -stage chain -of -thought. 

C3  Ours (w/o ICA)  SSRE -only 

ablation 

Uses the full SSRE workflow on a noisy 

pseudo -SceneSummary built from uncoordinated detections. 

C4  Ours  Full ICA + SSRE  Full method combining ICA with the four -stage SSRE 

workflow for verifiable reasoning and decision making. 

C5  Ours (w/o IVL)  Ablation of IVL  Ablated version of Ours that removes the Introspective 

Verification Loop from SSRE.  (For ablation  study  only) 

We report four families of metrics. (i) Task -level correctness uses QA EM (Exact Match) and 

Answer F1 for QA tasks, and Decision Accuracy (DA) for Decision QA. (ii) Explanation 

similarity uses BLEU -4 and ROUGE -L to quantify overlap with reference justifications. (iii) 

Safety is measured by Risk Identification F1 (RI F1), which evaluates risk detection performance. 

(iv) Reliability and hallucination are measured by Fact Consistency Pass Rate (FCPR) and 

Hallucinated Entity Mention Rate (HER; lower is better), which explicitly assess whether the 

decision and explanation remain consistent with the SceneSummary and whether the model 

mentions entities not present in the scene representation. 

5.5.1 Overall performance on NuScenes -QA and Waymo -QA 

Table  7. Overall performance of compared methods on the NuScenes -QA dataset (%). 

ID  Method  QA EM  Answer F1  DA  BLEU -4 ROUGE -L RI F1  FCPR  HER 

A1  BLIP -2 42.3  60.8  50.4  20.2  46.1  38.5  58.2  36.7 

A2  LLaVA  46.1  63.4  52.1  21.8  47.9  41.2  61.0  34.6 

A3  Qwen 2-VL  47.8  64.9  54.3  23.1  49.2  42.0  62.8  33.9 

A4  Talk2BEV -style  56.4  70.6  60.8  26.4  53.5  54.7  74.3  20.8 

B1  DriveGPT4 -style  52.6  67.3  69.4  31.2  58.4  58.6  76.1  21.5 

B2  PlanAgent -style  55.7  70.2  72.6  28.4  55.6  63.5  82.4  46.9 

C1  Ours (Raw -Text)  49.1  66.2  60.3  27.1  52.0  50.6  55.1  41.8 

C2  Ours (w/o SSRE)  57.3  72.4  68.2  26.2  53.2  57.4  79.3  17.6 

C3  Ours (w/o ICA)  58.1  73.1  70.4  26.8  54.0  59.2  81.2  15.9 

C4  Ours  64.3  77.5  76.2  28.9  56.3  66.4  93.2  7.4 Table  8. Overall performance of compared methods on the Waymo -QA dataset (%). 

ID  Method  QA EM  Answer F1  DA  BLEU -4 ROUGE -L RI F1  FCPR  HER 

A1  BLIP -2 39.2  57.6  46.4  19.1  44.0  35.7  55.3  38.9 

A2  LLaVA  42.1  60.2  48.5  20.7  45.8  38.4  57.9  36.8 

A3  Qwen 2-VL  44.3  61.9  50.1  21.8  46.7  39.2  59.0  35.6 

A4  Talk2BEV -style  53.2  67.1  56.3  24.6  51.2  50.7  71.3  22.7 

B1  DriveGPT4 -style  49.4  65.2  66.5  30.4  55.6  55.4  73.2  23.4 

B2  PlanAgent -style  52.5  67.4  70.2  27.2  53.4  60.6  79.4  18.6 

C1  Ours (Raw -Text)  46.1  63.1  56.0  24.8  49.7  47.2  52.4  43.7 

C2  Ours (w/o SSRE)  54.2  69.3  65.4  25.0  51.0  53.5  76.1  19.5 

C3  Ours (w/o ICA)  55.1  70.1  67.2  25.4  52.0  55.2  78.3  17.9 

C4  Ours  61.3  75.2  73.1  27.8  54.1  62.4  91.4  8.6 

Table  7 and  Table  8 report the overall results. On NuScenes -QA, the full system (C4) 

achieves the best performance across correctness, safety, and reliability, reaching 64.3% QA EM, 

77.5% Answer F1, 76.2% DA, and 66.4% RI F1, while also obtaining the highest FCPR (93.2%) 

and the lowest HER (7.4%). Notably, the strongest non -ours baseline (PlanAgent -style) remains 

behind C4 on QA and reliability (55.7% QA EM, 82.4% FCPR, and 46.9% HER), indicating that 

planning -oriented reasoning alone does not guarantee factual grounding under open -ended 

queries. 

On Waymo -QA, the same trend holds. C4 remains the best performer, achieving 61.3% QA 

EM, 75.2% Answer F1, 73.1% DA, and 62.4% RI F1, together with strong reliability (91.4% 

FCPR) and low hallucination (8.6% HER). In contrast, PlanAgent -style attains relatively high DA 

(70.2%) but shows weaker overall QA and reliability compared to C4 (52.5% QA EM and 79.4% 

FCPR). These results suggest that combining a clean, coordinated world model with 

verifier -aware reasoning provides more dependable open -world QA and decision making under 

domain shift. 

5.5.2 Task -type breakdown 

Table  9. Task -type -wise performance of compared methods on NuScenes -QA (%). 

Relation QA  Dynamic/Status QA  Risk Prediction QA  Decision QA 

ID  Method  EM  F1  EM  F1  EM  F1  RI F1  Accuracy 

A4  Talk2BEV -style  60.8  74.6  55.3  70.4  48.1  66.3  54.7  60.8 

B2 PlanAgent -style  58.6  72.0  54.1  68.8  54.0  70.2  63.5  72.6 

C1  Ours (Raw -Text)  50.2  67.3  46.1  63.8  40.4  60.1  50.6  60.3 

C2  Ours (w/o SSRE)  61.2  75.0  58.4  73.1  50.6  68.0  57.4  68.2 

C3  Ours (w/o ICA)  59.4  74.3  57.6  72.4  52.1  69.1  59.2  70.4 

C4  Ours  67.3  80.6  64.2  78.1  60.5  74.0  66.4  76.2 

Table  10 . Task -type -wise performance of compared methods on  Waymo -QA (%). 

Relation QA  Dynamic / Status QA  Risk Prediction QA  Decision QA 

ID  Method  EM  F1  EM  F1  EM  F1  RI F1  Accuracy 

A4  Talk2BEV -style  57.1  71.2  52.0  67.1  45.0  63.0  50.7  56.3 

B2 PlanAgent -style  55.3  69.0  51.0  66.2  51.2  67.3  60.6  70.2 

C1  Ours (Raw -Text)  46.8  64.0  42.7  61.1  37.1  57.4  47.2  56.0 C2  Ours (w/o SSRE)  58.0  72.4  55.1  70.2  46.3  64.1  53.5  65.4                   

> C3 Ours (w/o ICA) 56.2 71.5 54.0 69.3 48.0 65.0 55.2 67.2
> C4 Ours 64.1 78.4 61.0 75.2 57.0 71.0 62.4 73.1

Table  9 and Table  10  further break down performance by question type. On NuScenes -QA, 

C4 achieves the best scores on all subtasks, including 67.3 % / 80.6 % (EM/F1) on Relation QA, 

64.2 % / 78.1 % on Dynamic/Status QA, 60.5 % / 74.0 % on Risk Prediction QA, and 76.2% on 

Decision QA. On Waymo -QA, C4 consistently leads with 64.1 % / 78.4 % on Relation QA, 61.0 % /

75.2 % on Dynamic/Status QA, 57.0 % / 71.0 % on Risk Prediction QA, and 73.1% Decision 

Accuracy. Furthermore, the raw -text baseline (C1) underperforms across all subtasks, highlighting 

the necessity of structured, coordinated inputs for open -world reasoning. 

5.5.3 Ablation study: ICA, SSRE, and IVL 

As shown in Table  11 , w e conduct an ablation study by averaging results over NuScenes -QA 

and Waymo -QA to isolate the contribution of each component. The full model (C4) yields the best 

average performance (62.8% QA EM, 76.4% Answer F1, 74.7% DA, 64.4% RI F1) and markedly 

improves reliability (92.3% FCPR with only 8.0% HER). Introducing ICA alone (C2 vs. C1) 

substantially improves both correctness and reliability, indicating that converting noisy perception 

outputs into a clean SceneSummary is a prerequisite for stable reasoning. In contrast, removing 

IVL (C5) causes a clear drop in reliability (FCPR 87.3% and HER 10.7%), while task correctness 

changes marginally, suggesting that verifier -style self -checking primarily serves as the final 

safeguard against hallucination -driven justifications.                                             

> Table 11 .Ablation results of the ICA and SSRE workflow averaged over the NuScenes -QA and Waymo -QA
> datasets (%).
> ID Method QA EM Answer F1 DA RI F1 FCPR HER
> C1 Ours (Raw -Text) 47.6 64.7 58.2 48.9 53.8 42.8
> C2 Ours (w/o SSRE) 55.8 70.9 66.8 55.5 77.7 18.6
> C3 Ours (w/o ICA) 56.6 71.6 68.8 57.2 79.8 16.9
> C5 Ours (w/o IVL) 62.1 75.7 74.0 62.9 87.3 10.7
> C4 Ours 62.8 76.4 74.7 64.4 92.3 8.0

5.5.4 Multidimensional capability visualization and generalization gap 

To provide an intuitive, holistic view of how different paradigms trade off task correctness, 

safety, reliability, and explanation quality, we adopt radar charts over six normalized dimensions: 

QA EM, Decision Accuracy (DA), Risk Identification F1 (RI F1), Fact  Consistency  Pass  Rate 

(FCPR), 1−HER, and ROUGE -L. Following our experimental protocol, each radar chart overlays 

five representative curves: VLM Avg (A1 –A3), Talk2BEV -style, DriveGPT4 -style, 

PlanAgent -style, and Ours (C4). All metrics are normalized to [0,1] when visualized as absolute 

scores to ensure comparability across axes. 

A direct side -by -side comparison of absolute scores on NuScenes -QA vs. Waymo -QA can 

become visually insensitive when the two benchmarks are intentionally aligned in task definition 

and question templates (as is the case for our Waymo -QA construction). To make cross -dataset 

robustness explicit and directly answer the protocol’s generalization question, we adopt a 

two -panel design: 

Left panel (“NuScenes -QA (Absolute, normalized to [0,1])”) visualizes the absolute capability profile on NuScenes -QA, capturing the multi -axis performance footprint and 

paradigm -level trade -offs. 

Right panel (“Waymo -QA (Generalization Gap, pp; Outer=Better)”) visualizes the 

generalization gap from NuScenes -QA to Waymo -QA on a per -metric basis. For each metric  𝑚 ,

we define the gap in percentage points (pp) as: ( )

.NuScenes Waymo m m mpp Score Score  = −

The radar charts yield three consistent observations. First, the full system forms the broadest 

capability envelope on NuScenes -QA, driven by simultaneous gains on safety and reliability axes 

rather than sacrificing correctness. Second, explanation similarity and factual reliability are 

separable: a higher ROUGE -L (e.g., DriveGPT4 -style) does not necessarily imply stronger factual 

consistency or lower hallucination, reinforcing the need to jointly report reliability metrics in 

safety -critical QA. Third, the generalization -gap view shows that the full system degrades least on 

reliability axes (e.g., only 1.8 pp drop on FCPR and 1.2 pp drop on 1−HER), while some 

capability dimensions (e.g., risk) remain more sensitive to domain shift, providing a nuanced 

picture of robustness beyond aggregate scores.        

> Figure 5. Multidimensional capability radar: absolute performance vs cross -dataset generalization.

5.5.5 Summary 

Across NuScenes -QA and Waymo -QA, the full ICA+SSRE system (C4) achieves the 

strongest overall trade -off between correctness, safety, and reliability. It delivers the best 

QA/decision scores while substantially improving factual grounding (FCPR=93.2%  / 91.4%) and 

keeping hallucinations low (HER=7.4%  / 8.6%). Task -type results show consistent gains on 

relation, dynamic, risk, and decision queries, and the ablation study attributes the improvements to 

complementary roles: ICA primarily stabilizes grounding by constructing a clean SceneSummary, 

whereas SSRE —especially IVL —further reduces hallucination -driven inconsistencies with 

limited impact on raw correctness. Overall, these results support the core claim that a coordinated 

single -source world model combined with verifier -aware reasoning is critical for dependable 

open -world driving QA and high -level decision making under domain shift. 5.6 Qualitative case studies 

This section provides qualitative case studies to complement the quantitative  evaluation, 

illustrating how the proposed neuro -symbolic architecture improves  reliability in open -domain 

driving scene understanding. Using three representative  scenes from nuScenes v1.0 -mini, we 

visualize (i) cross -modal conflict resolution and  completeness in the intermediate world model 

(SceneSummary), (ii)  disambiguation benefits of a unified structured interface for downstream 

reasoning, and (iii) verifiable risk -aware decision making under hallucination -inducing prompts. 

Figures  6-8 summarize each case with a front -camera view and a LiDAR BEV  visualization, 

followed by two natural -language queries (Q1 –Q2) and the  corresponding answers from 

representative baselines and our method. To improve readability, blue highlights mark the key 

claims that the reader should attend to in our outputs (typically grounded entities/relations/actions 

that are directly  supported by the Evidence box), while red highlights mark salient failure cues in 

baseline outputs (e.g., unresolved conflicts, explicit uncertainty, or unsupported/incorrect 

premises). In addition, each case includes a compact  “Evidence” box: Cases A –B primarily cite 

ICA -cleaned SceneSummary records, whereas Case C primarily cites SSRE trace snippets 

(SRA/VRCG/IVL) that are explicitly grounded on the ICA SceneSummary. 

5.6.1 Case  study A:  cross -modal  conflict  resolution for  safety -critical  attributes 

Figure  6 shows scene -0061 (sample  #10) in nuScenes v1.0 -mini, where the ego vehicle 

approaches an intersection influenced by roadside construction. The scene contains (i) a closest 

leading vehicle whose semantic type is reported inconsistently across modalities, and (ii) 

pedestrians near the crosswalk/conflict zone that require conservative driving behavior. We ask: 

(Q1) the type of the closest leading vehicle ahead (e.g., sedan/SUV/van/MPV), and (Q2) whether 

pedestrians exist near the conflict zone and what action is recommended. 

The Naive Fusion + LLM baseline exposes the core difficulty: when the prompt contains 

contradictory type reports for the same spatial location, the model tends to either remain explicitly 

uncertain or produce hedged answers, which weakens its usefulness for downstream decisions. 

End -to -end V -L agents (DriveGPT4 -style) and BEV -based VLMs (Talk2BEV -style) may commit 

to a single type, but their commitment can differ across methods, reflecting the lack of an explicit, 

shared conflict -resolution mechanism in the interface used for reasoning in this case. 

In contrast, our ICA module resolves the cross -modal type conflict into a single fused entity 

record and retains a single -sensor pedestrian detection for completeness, producing a clean 

SceneSummary as the “single source of truth.” The answer of ICA+SSRE therefore becomes 

consistent across Q1 –Q2: the leading vehicle type is reported as van/MPV (with the prior 

cross -modal disagreement auditable), and the presence of pedestrians near the crosswalk triggers a 

conservative action (“slow down and prepare to yield/stop before entering the conflict zone”). The 

Evidence box in  Figure 6  is intentionally minimal and primarily sourced from ICA output: (i) a 

fused record with an explicit conflict_resolved field for the lead vehicle, and (ii) a pedestrian 

record retained despite a radar miss, supporting both correctness and safety -critical completeness. Figure  6. Case A: C ross -modal  conflict  resolution for  safety -critical  attributes .

5.6.2 Case  study  B:  Motion –intent  disambiguation with a  unified SceneSummary  interface 

Figure  7 presents scene -0103 (sample  #4), a typical urban intersection where fine -grained 

motion status and turning intent must be inferred to reason about conflict -zone occupancy. We 

query: (Q1) whether the closest ego -lane vehicle ahead is moving or stationary, and (Q2) what the 

front -left black car is doing (turning/going straight/parked) and whether it will enter the ego 

vehicle’s conflict zone. 

This case highlights an interface -driven ambiguity: single -frame image evidence (LLaVA) 

often provides limited observability for motion, while text -only reasoning on uncoordinated 

multi -sensor logs (Naive Fusion + LLM) may be dominated by duplicated or inconsistent entries, 

resulting in low -confidence answers about “moving vs. stopped” and “will enter vs. will not enter.” 

BEV -based VLMs (Talk2BEV -style) typically offer clearer spatial judgments, yet the absence of an explicit, typed world state can still leave intent and conflict -zone relations under -specified. 

Our method and evidence. With ICA, the SceneSummary explicitly encodes lane_relation, 

motion_state, intent, and zone for the relevant entities, turning the ambiguous “interpretation 

problem” into a direct “query over a structured world model.” Consequently, ICA+SSRE answers 

Q1 –Q2 with consistent, decision -relevant statements: the closest ego -lane vehicle is moving, and 

the front -left black car is turning left and will temporarily enter the conflict zone; the 

recommended action is to slow down and be prepared to yield/stop before the crosswalk until the 

conflict clears. Here, the Evidence box is again primarily sourced from ICA output 

(SceneSummary fields), because the key contribution in this case is disambiguation via a unified 

interface rather than a multi -step verifier.    

> Figure 7.Case B: Motion –intent disambiguation with a unified SceneSummary interface .

5.6.3 Case  study  C: Verifiable  risk  reasoning under  false -premise  prompts 

Figure  8 shows scene -1094 (sample #27), a nighttime driving scenario with reduced visibility 

and vulnerable road users near the roadside. Beyond normal risk -aware decision making (Q1), we 

include a “false -premise” query (Q2) that explicitly asks about a bicycle overtaking on the right, 

which is a common trigger for hallucinated entities in generative models. Figure  8. Case C:  Verifiable risk reasoning under false -premise prompts .

Pure VLM reasoning (LLaVA ) and structured planning -style agents (PlanAgent -style) often 

respond cautiously to Q2 (e.g., “cannot clearly confirm”), but may still condition actions on an 

unverified premise (“if a bicycle is overtaking”), which can be acceptable for conservative driving 

yet remains evidentially weak. In contrast, the DriveGPT4 -style agent in this case explicitly 

accepts the false premise and asserts the existence of a bicycle, exemplifying an unsafe failure 

mode: recommending avoidance behavior for an entity that is not supported by the perceived 

world state. Our method and evidence. ICA+SSRE handles Q2 by explicitly separating “question premise 

verification” from “action generation.” The SSRE trace first ranks risks via SRA using grounded 

entity references, then produces a VRCG decision with supporting_entity_ids, and finally invokes 

IVL to verify whether the bicycle premise is supported by the SceneSummary. Since the consistent 

world model contains no bicycle entity type, IVL rejects the premise and the final 

recommendation avoids unnecessary avoidance maneuvers (“do not take avoidance actions for a 

non -existent target; keep lane and continue observing”). Accordingly, the Evidence box in Fi gure 

8 is primarily sourced from SSRE traces grounded on the ICA SceneSummary: an SRA risk item 

linked to pedestrian entities, a VRCG decision JSON with explicit supporting_entity_ids, a 

negative type -presence check from the SceneSummary, and an IVL verdict that marks the premise 

as unsupported. 

5.6.4 General  discussion  for case study 

Across the three cases, a consistent pattern emerges: reliability gains come primarily from 

controlling the information interface and verifiability constraints, rather than relying on the 

generative model to reconcile noisy evidence on its own. Cases A –B show that ICA’s deterministic 

coordination turns multi -sensor disagreements and omissions into a clean, typed SceneSummary 

with auditable provenance, enabling downstream models to answer attribute, motion, and intent 

questions without being dominated by cross -modal redundancy or contradictions. 

Case C further indicates that a clean world model alone is insufficient under adversarial or 

misleading queries; a verifier -aware reasoning workflow is required to prevent premise -driven 

hallucinations from propagating into actions. By grounding each decision in supporting entity IDs 

and enforcing an explicit verification step (IVL), SSRE makes it possible to (i) reject unsupported 

premises, (ii) keep risk assessment aligned with actual entities, and (iii) provide concise, 

audit -friendly evidence traces. 

These qualitative findings align with the quantitative trends reported earlier (higher 

consistency and lower hallucination rates), reinforcing the central thesis of this work: a structured 

single -source world representation (SceneSummary) plus verifiable reasoning constraints (SSRE) 

is a practical design for reliable autonomous driving scene understanding. 

5.7 Overall  discussion 

Across Sections  5.2 –5.6, the results support the main claim of this work: reliable 

open -domain driving cognition is achieved by (i) coordinating heterogeneous perception into a 

single auditable world state and (ii) constraining reasoning with verifiability, rather than expecting 

a generative model to reconcile noisy, conflicting evidence implicitly. In our pipeline, ICA 

constructs a globally consistent SceneSummary, and SSRE (with IVL) enforces risk -aware and 

self -verifying reasoning on top of that representation. 

At the perception stage, ICA maintains competitive detection accuracy while substantially 

improving fusion usability. On nuScenes/Waymo, Ours achieves 70.9 % / 73.2 % mAP/NDS and 

69.8 % mAP yet produces a far cleaner fused output (ERR=0.7%  / 1.0%, ACR=98.0%  / 95.0 %). 

Without coordination, naïve aggregation (Ours w/o ICA) yields severe redundancy and 

inconsistency (ERR=25 –30%, ACR=70 –75%). This pattern is reinforced by the scene -consistency 

benchmark: ICA -based fusion reaches CRR=91.7% and MDCR=74.6% with only HE=0.1 

hallucinated entities per scene, whereas representative perception -to -LLM pipelines remain at 

CRR < 5% and introduce 0.9 –1.6 hallucinations per scene. Section  5.4 shows that the unified SceneSummary interface benefits LLM reasoning in both 

effectiveness and efficiency. Replacing raw multi -agent detection logs (~1000 tokens) with a 

compact SceneSummary -plus -synopsis (~260 tokens) improves Accuracy by 20 –25 points and 

reduces HR to 5 –10% across backbones, while cutting APL by ~74% (~3.8×) and reducing AIT by 

~36 –42%. Notably, these results indicate that input structure/quality can partially offset model 

scale, which supports using a typed interface rather than relying on larger models or ad -hoc 

prompting alone. 

Section  5.5 provides end -to -end evidence on open -world QA and decision reasoning under 

domain shift. The full ICA+SSRE system performs best on both NuScenes -QA and Waymo -QA 

(e.g., 64.3 % / 77.5 % QA EM/Answer F1 and 76.2% DA on NuScenes -QA; 61.3 % / 75.2 % and 

73.1% on Waymo -QA) and achieves strong grounding (FCPR=93.2%  / 91.4%) with low 

hallucination (HER=7.4%/8.6%). The ablation study clarifies complementary roles: ICA primarily 

stabilizes the factual basis (C2 vs C1: FCPR 53.8%  to  77.7%, HER 42.8%  to  18.6%), while IVL 

mainly strengthens reliability (C5 vs C4: FCPR 87.3% vs 92.3%, HER 10.7% vs 8.0%) with 

marginal changes to raw correctness. Moreover, the cross -dataset gaps on reliability remain small 

(Δ FCPR=1.8 pp;  Δ(1− HER)=1.2 pp), and the radar analysis emphasizes that BLEU/ROUGE -style 

overlap does not substitute for factual faithfulness —motivating explicit reporting of FCPR/HER 

in safety -critical evaluation. 

The qualitative case studies in Section  5.6 corroborate these quantitative trends with 

mechanism -level evidence. Cases A –B show that ICA converts cross -modal disagreements and 

omissions into a typed, auditable SceneSummary that supports consistent answers for 

safety -critical attributes and motion/intent queries. Case C further highlights robustness under 

misleading prompts: by separating premise verification from action generation, SSRE+IVL rejects 

unsupported entities (e.g., the queried bicycle) and prevents premise -driven hallucinations from 

propagating into high -level decisions. 

6. Conclusion 

This paper presented  InfoCoordiBridge , a BEV -centric neuro -symbolic architecture for 

reliable open -world scene understanding in autonomous driving. The proposed framework bridges 

multimodal  perception and large language model (LLM) reasoning through an explicit 

coordination layer. Concretely, we introduced (i) a unified multi -agent perception interface that 

produces well -typed structured facts and modality -focused synopses, (ii) an Information 

Coordination and Abstraction (ICA) module that deterministically aligns entities, resolves 

cross -modal conflicts, and constructs an auditable SceneSummary as a single source of truth, and 

(iii) a SceneSummary -Driven Reasoning Engine (SSRE) that performs verifiable chain -of -prompt 

reasoning with explicit entity grounding and an introspective verification loop. 

Extensive experiments on nuScenes and Waymo demonstrate that the proposed approach 

achieves competitive 3D detection performance while substantially improving fusion consistency 

and reliability. In particular, our method reaches 70.9 % mAP / 73.2 % NDS on nuScenes and  69.8 %

mAP  on Waymo, and the ICA module yields low inconsistency error rates (e.g., ERR=0.7 % / 1.0 %

and ACR=98.0 % / 95.0 % on nuScenes /Waymo) while maintaining strong detection accuracy. 

Moreover, on open -world QA and decision reasoning, the full system achieves the best overall 

correctness and reliability, reaching QA EM=64.3 % / 61.3 %, Answer F1=77.5 / 75.2, and 

DA=76.2 / 73.1 on NuScenes -QA and Waymo -QA, respectively, while attaining high fact -consistency (FCPR=93.2% / 91.4%) and low hallucination rates (HER=7.4% / 8.6%).  These 

results support the central thesis that coordinating perception into a clean symbolic world state 

before invoking LLM reasoning is an effective way to mitigate hallucinations and improve 

robustness by construction. 

Future work will focus on extending the framework to longer temporal horizons and more 

interactive multi -agent traffic settings, improving efficiency for real -time deployment, and 

strengthening formal safety guarantees (e.g., tighter verification objectives and richer consistency 

constraints). Another promising direction is to reduce reliance on prompt engineering by learning 

compact, task -aware verifiers and by integrating the SceneSummary representation more tightly 

with downstream planning and control. 

CRediT authorship contribution statement 

Shuo Liu:  Writing  – original draft, Methodology.  Lei Shi:  Conceptualization.  Haowen Liu: 

Resources, Data  curation.  Jing Xu:  Formal  analysis, Supervision.  Yufei Gao:  Investigation, 

Visualization.  Yucheng Shi:  Writing  – review and editing, Conceptualization. 

Declaration of competing interest 

The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 

relationships that could have appeared to influence the work  reported in this paper. 

Data availability 

Data will be made available on request. 

Acknowledgements 

This work was supported in part by  the  National  Natural Science Foundation  of  China 

(62406293) , the Key research and development program of Henan Province ( 251111212100 ) and 

the Postdoctor al Innovative Talent Support Program (GZC20251644). 

Appendix A.  Pseudocode of the Information Coordination and Abstraction (ICA) module 

The ICA module deterministically aligns multi -agent perception outputs into a unified, 

conflict -resolved world state called SceneSummary. In our setting, LiDAR/BEVFusion/Radar 

provide geometric estimates in the ego -centric BEV frame, whereas the camera agent mainly 

provides fine -grained semantic attributes (e.g., color and intent cues) from 2D observations. 

Importantly, the association between camera observations and BEV entities is performed via 

projection -based matching and semantic compatibility, without assuming that the dataset provides 

per -pixel depth.       

> Algorithm A.1 ICA pipeline (compact pseudocode)
> Input s:
> -D^B: BEVFusion detections (3D boxes / states in ego -BEV)
> -D^L: LiDAR detections (3D boxes / states in ego -BEV)
> -D^R: Radar detections (2D/3D states in ego -BEV, depending on sensor)
> -D^C: Camera detections (2D boxes + semantics in image; optional camera -only 3D if available)

- Calib: camera intrinsics/extrinsics for projection 

- : gating thresholds, matching thresholds, modality priors and reliabilities 

Output: 

- S: SceneSummary (a single, conflict -resolved structured world state) 

Procedure: 

1) Normalize and wrap agent outputs 

For each modality s  ∈ {B, L, R}: 

- Convert detections to a common ego -centric BEV state form: 

z_i^s = ( μ_ i^s,  Σ_ i^s, class_i^s, attrs_i^s, score_i^s) 

For camera modality C: 

- Keep 2D boxes b_k^C and semantic attributes attrs_k^C (e.g., color, intent cues). 

- Do NOT require depth; geometry is not updated from camera -only 2D observations. 

2) Stage -1 association: LiDAR  ↔ BEVFusion (build geometric seeds) 

- Build candidate pairs via gating in BEV (e.g., distance / Mahalanobis). 

- Compute a composite matching cost that prioritizes geometry consistency. 

- Solve one -to -one assignment (Hungarian) to obtain matches M_{L,B}. 

- Initialize entity seeds E from matched pairs; keep unmatched detections as single -source entities. 

3) Stage -2 association: Radar  → Seeds (motion refinement) 

- Build candidate pairs between radar detections and seeds via gating and velocity consistency. 

- Solve assignment and attach radar observations to the corresponding entities. 

4) Stage -3 association: Camera semantics  → Entities (projection -based attachment) 

For each camera view: 

- Project each entity’s current 3D box/state to the image plane using Calib,  obtaining a predicted 2D 

region  \hat (Bai, et al. )(e). 

- For each camera detection b_k^C, compute IoU( \hat (Bai, et al. )(e), b_k^C) and check class 

compatibility. 

- Solve assignment between entities and camera detections using an IoU -dominant cost. 

- For each matched pair (e, k): 

attach attrs_k^C to entity e as semantic evidence (no geometry overwrite). 

5) Conflict checking and attribute fusion (per entity) 

For each entity e: 

- Collect all available observations {z^s} from its attached modalities. 

- For continuous attributes (position, velocity, size, yaw): 

fuse using modality -aware information weighting; 

if sources are potentially dependent, apply covariance intersection (CI). 

- For discrete attributes (class, color, intent tags): 

fuse via weighted voting with modality reliability priors. 

- Produce ambiguity flags when evidence remains inconsistent. 

6) Structured summary generation 

- Serialize the fused entities into SceneSummary S with: 

id, type/class, fused state, confidence, source lineage, ambiguity flags, and optional scene -level notes. 

Return S. 

Appendix B.  Prompt templates for the chain -of -prompt reasoning workflow 

This section lists the prompts used in SSRE (Section 4.3) to support structured parsing, 

systematic risk assessment, decision reasoning, introspective verification, and revision. All 

prompts treat the  SceneSummary  produced by ICA as the single source of truth for the current 

reasoning instance, and they prohibit introducing new entities that do not appear in the input. 

B.1. Prompt template for structured scene parsing ( T parse _ )

T_parse | Structured Scene Parsing 

Role:  You are a scene -graph parser for autonomous driving. 

Input: 

- SceneSummary S (JSON), containing a list of entities with IDs and state estimates. 

Output: 

- M (a structured intermediate representation) in the exact schema below. 

Rules: 

1) Do not invent entities, attributes, or relations. 

2) You may compute ONLY deterministic derived quantities from S (e.g., speed magnitude, pairwise 

distance,  relative direction, and "approaching" based on position/velocity). Do not infer intentions unless S 

explicitly contains an intent tag. 

3) Use entity references strictly in the form ID_<number> (e.g., ID_17). 

4) If a field is missing in S, output "unknown" for that field. 

Output schema  (YAML -like, keep the keys and order): 

ENTITIES: 

- id: ID_17 

type: <from S> 

position_bev_m: [x, y] 

velocity_bev_mps: [vx, vy] 

size_m: [l, w, h] 

heading_rad: <value or unknown> 

confidence: <value or unknown> 

sources: <list> 

semantic_attributes: <list or empty> 

flags: <list or empty> 

RELATIONS (optional; only if computable from S): 

- subject: ID_17 

relation: <ahead_of | behind_of | left_of | right_of | near | far | approaching | moving_away> 

object: ID_35 

evidence: <brief numeric evidence based on S, e.g., distance=8.2m> 

Now parse S into M. B.2. Prompt template for systematic risk assessment ( T risk _ )

T_risk  | Systematic Risk Assessment 

Role:  You are a driving safety risk assessment agent. 

Input: 

- M (structured scene representation) 

Output: 

- L_risk : a prioritized JSON array of risk items, sorted by (severity, urgency) descending. 

Rules: 

1) Base the assessment ONLY on M. Do not assume unobserved traffic rules, signals, or occlusions 

unless stated. 

2) Each item must reference involved entities using ID_<number>. 

3) Use severity and urgency on a 1 –5 scale (5 = highest). 

4) If there is insufficient evidence, output a risk with low confidence rather than fabricating details. 

Output JSON schema :

[

{

"risk_type": "<collision | cut_in | rear_end | pedestrian_crossing | occlusion | rule_violation |

unknown>", 

"involved_entity_ids": ["ID_17", "ID_35"], 

"severity": 1 -5, 

"urgency": 1 -5, 

"confidence": 0.0 -1.0, 

"evidence": "A short, verifiable statement that cites fields/relations from M." 

}, 

... 

]

Now generate L_risk. 

B.3. Prompt template for decision reasoning ( T reason _ )

T_reason | Decision Reasoning with Grounded Justification 

Role:  You are an autonomous driving decision agent that must remain strictly grounded. 

Input s:

- User query Q (natural language) 

- M (structured scene representation) 

- L_risk (prioritized risk list) 

- Optional auxiliary descriptions A (free -text; may be noisy) 

Output s:

1) D_draft (JSON decision) 

2) N_draft (natural -language justification) 

Rules: 

1) Treat M as the primary source of truth. A can be used only to provide linguistic phrasing and 

MUST NOT  introduce new entities or contradict M. 

2) Every factual claim in N_draft must cite at least one entity ID in parentheses, e.g., "(ID_17)". 3) If evidence is insufficient, choose a conservative action and lower the confidence. 

4) Do not output hidden reasoning traces; provide a concise, verifiable justification. 

Decision JSON schema :

{

"recommended_action": "<keep_lane | slow_down  | stop | yield | change_lane_left | change_lane_right | 

follow | unknown>", 

"confidence": 0.0 -1.0, 

"target_entity_ids": ["ID_17", "..."], 

"risk_summary": "One sentence summarizing the main risks considered.", 

"constraints": ["optional safety constraints or checks, if any"] 

}

Now answer Q using (M, L_risk, A) and output D_draft first, then N_draft. 

B.4. Prompt template for introspective verification ( T_verify  )

T_verify | Introspective Verification 

Role:  You are a verifier. Your task is to check whether the draft decision and justification 

contradict the SceneSummary S. 

Input s:

- SceneSummary S (JSON) 

- D_draft (decision JSON) 

- N_draft (justification text) 

Output: 

- V (a JSON object) 

Verification checklist: 

1) No new entity IDs appear in D_draft or N_draft that are absent in S. 

2) Any stated entity type/state (position/velocity/size) must not contradict S. 

3) If a claim cannot be verified from S, mark it as unsupported. 

4) Focus on factual grounding, not writing style. 

Output JSON schema: 

{

"verdict": "PASS" | "FAIL", 

"unsupported_or_conflicting_claims": [ 

{"claim": "...", "reason": "..."} 

], 

"comment": "One short comment for revision." 

}

Now verify and output V. 

B.5. Prompt template for revision ( T revision _ )

T_revision | Revision under Verifier Feedback 

Role:  You are a reviser. You must revise (D_draft, N_draft) based on verifier output V. 

Input s:

- M, L_risk, Q 

- D_draft, N_draft - V (verifier JSON) 

Output s:

- D_final (JSON decision) 

- N_final (justification text) 

Rules: 

1) Remove or correct any unsupported/conflicting claims listed in V. 

2) Keep entity references consistent (ID_<number>). 

3) If conflicts cannot be resolved, choose a more conservative action and reduce confidence. 

Now produce D_final and N_final. 

Appendix C.  Template design for generating driving QA pairs from the Waymo dataset 

To evaluate open -world question answering and decision consistency under domain shift, we 

convert Waymo scenes into a driving QA format by instantiating rule -based question templates 

over the scene graph. We provide four representative template families: relation and relative 

position QA, counting QA, risk prediction QA, and decision -making QA. 

We use the ego -centric BEV frame (x -forward, y-left). Relations such as 

“front/behind/left/right/near” are instantiated by deterministic thresholds on relative coordinates 

and Euclidean distance. Risk labels can be generated using simple kinematic criteria (e.g., 

time -to -collision) consistent with the annotations available in Waymo. 

C.1. Template family 1: relation and relative position (Yes/No) 

Question: 

"Is there a <REL> relationship between the <OBJ_1> and the <OBJ_2> in the current scene?" 

Examples of <REL>: in front of, behind, to the left of, to the right of, near. 

Answer: 

"Yes" if the instantiated relation holds under the BEV -threshold rules; otherwise "No". 

C.2. Template family 2: counting (integer) 

Question: 

"How many <OBJ_2> are <REL> the <OBJ_1> in the current scene?" 

Answer: 

"<N>", where N is the number of objects satisfying the relation under the BEV -threshold rules. 

C.3. Template family 3: risk prediction (Yes/No + short rationale) 

Question: 

"Is there a potential collision risk between the ego vehicle and the <OBJ_2> in the next <T> seconds?" 

Answer: 

"Yes" if a simple kinematic criterion (e.g., TTC <  τ)  is triggered; otherwise "No". 

(Optionally provide a short rationale: distance and closing speed.) 

C.4. Template family 4: decision -making (multiple -choice) 

Question: 

"Given the current scene, what is the safest immediate action for the ego vehicle?" 

Options: A) keep lane and maintain speed  

> B) slow down
> C) stop / yield
> D) change lane left
> E) change lane right
> Answer:
> Se lect the option consistent with the generated risk label and scene constraints (e.g., choose B/C when high
> collision risk is present).

References 

Ahn, M., Brohan, A., Brown, N., Chebotar, Y., Cortes, O., David, B., Finn, C., Fu, C., Gopalakrishnan, K., 

& Hausman, K. (2022). Do as i can, not as i say: Grounding language in robotic affordances. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.01691 .

Alayrac, J. -B., Donahue, J., Luc, P., Miech, A., Barr, I., Hasson, Y., Lenc, K., Mensch, A., Millican, K., & 

Reynolds, M. (2022). Flamingo: a visual language model for few -shot learning.  Advances in 

neural information processing systems, 35 , 23716 –23736. 

Bai, X., Hu, Z., Zhu, X., Huang, Q., Chen, Y., Fu, H., & Tai, C. -L. (2022). Transfusion: Robust lidar -camera 

fusion for 3d object detection with transformers. In  Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference 

on computer vision and pattern recognition  (pp. 1090 –1099). 

Caesar, H., Bankiti, V., Lang, A. H., Vora, S., Liong, V. E., Xu, Q., Krishnan, A., Pan, Y., Baldan, G., & 

Beijbom, O. (2020). nuscenes: A multimodal dataset for autonomous driving. In 

Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition  (pp. 

11621 –11631). 

Chakraborty, N., Ornik, M., & Driggs -Campbell, K. (2025). Hallucination detection in foundation 

models for decision -making: A flexible definition and review of the state of the art.  ACM 

Computing Surveys, 57 , 1 –35. 

Choi, M., Goel, H., Omama, M., Yang, Y., Shah, S., & Chinchali, S. (2024). Towards neuro -symbolic video 

understanding. In  European Conference on Computer Vision  (pp. 220 –236): Springer. 

Choudhary, T., Dewangan, V., Chandhok, S., Priyadarshan, S., Jain, A., Singh, A. K., Srivastava, S., 

Jatavallabhula, K. M., & Krishna, K. M. (2024). Talk2bev: Language -enhanced bird’s -eye view 

maps for autonomous driving. In  2024 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and 

Automation (ICRA)  (pp. 16345 –16352): IEEE. 

Cui, C., Yang, Z., Zhou, Y., Ma, Y., Lu, J., Li, L., Chen, Y., Panchal, J., & Wang, Z. (2024). Personalized 

autonomous driving with large language models: Field experiments. In  2024 IEEE 27th 

International Conference on Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITSC)  (pp. 20 –27): IEEE. 

Elboher, Y. Y., Raviv, A., Weiss, Y. L., Cohen, O., Assa, R., Katz, G., & Kugler, H. (2024). Formal Verification 

of Deep Neural Networks for Object Detection. 

Heo, S., Son, S., & Park, H. (2025). HaluCheck: Explainable and verifiable automation for detecting 

hallucinations in LLM responses.  Expert Systems with Applications, 272 , 126712. 

Hou, X., Wang, W., Yang, L., Lin, H., Feng, J., Min, H., & Zhao, X. (2025). Driveagent: Multi -agent 

structured reasoning with llm and multimodal sensor fusion for autonomous driving.  arXiv 

preprint arXiv:2505.02123 .

Huang, X., Wolff, E. M., Vernaza, P., Phan -Minh, T., Chen, H., Hayden, D. S., Edmonds, M., Pierce, B., 

Chen, X., & Jacob, P. E. (2024). Drivegpt: Scaling autoregressive behavior models for driving. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.14415 .

Huang, Y., Sun, L., Wang, H., Wu, S., Zhang, Q., Li, Y., Gao, C., Huang, Y., Lyu, W., & Zhang, Y. (2024). 

Position: Trustllm: Trustworthiness in large language models. In  International Conference on 

Machine Learning  (pp. 20166 –20270): PMLR. 

Hussien, M. M., Melo, A. N., Ballardini, A. L., Maldonado, C. S., Izquierdo, R., & Sotelo, M. A. (2025). 

Rag -based explainable prediction of road users behaviors for automated driving using 

knowledge graphs and large language models.  Expert Systems with Applications, 265 ,

125914. 

Ji, H., Ni, T., Huang, X., Shi, Z., Luo, T., Zhan, X., & Chen, J. (2025). Ropetr: Improving temporal 

camera -only 3d detection by integrating enhanced rotary position embedding.  arXiv preprint 

arXiv:2504.12643 .

Jiang, Y., Zhang, L., Miao, Z., Zhu, X., Gao, J., Hu, W., & Jiang, Y. -G. (2023). Polarformer: Multi -camera 

3d object detection with polar transformer. In  Proceedings of the AAAI conference on 

Artificial Intelligence  (Vol. 37, pp. 1042 –1050). 

Li, J., Li, D., Savarese, S., & Hoi, S. (2023). Blip -2: Bootstrapping language -image pre -training with 

frozen image encoders and large language models. In  International conference on machine 

learning  (pp. 19730 –19742): PMLR. 

Li, Y., Fan, L., Liu, Y., Huang, Z., Chen, Y., Wang, N., & Zhang, Z. (2024). Fully sparse fusion for 3d object 

detection.  IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 46 , 7217 –7231. 

Li, Y., Ge, Z., Yu, G., Yang, J., Wang, Z., Shi, Y., Sun, J., & Li, Z. (2023). Bevdepth: Acquisition of reliable 

depth for multi -view 3d object detection. In  Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial 

intelligence  (Vol. 37, pp. 1477 –1485). 

Li, Z., Wang, W., Li, H., Xie, E., Sima, C., Lu, T., Yu, Q., & Dai, J. (2024). Bevformer: learning 

bird's -eye -view representation from lidar -camera via spatiotemporal transformers.  IEEE 

Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence .

Li, Z., Yu, Z., Wang, W., Anandkumar, A., Lu, T., & Alvarez, J. M. (2023). Fb -bev: Bev representation from 

forward -backward view transformations. In  Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International 

Conference on Computer Vision  (pp. 6919 –6928). 

Liu, H., Li, C., Wu, Q., & Lee, Y. J. (2023). Visual instruction tuning.  Advances in neural information 

processing systems, 36 , 34892 –34916. 

Liu, S., Shi, L., Shi, Y., Gao, Y., & Sun, X. (2025). Traffic scene perception via multimodal large language 

model with data augmentation and efficient training strategy.  Applied Soft Computing ,

113210. 

Liu, Z., Tang, H., Amini, A., Yang, X., Mao, H., Rus, D. L., & Han, S. (2023). BEVFusion: Multi -Task 

Multi -Sensor Fusion with Unified Bird's -Eye View Representation. In  2023 IEEE International 

Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA)  (pp. 2774 –2781): IEEE. 

Maene, J., & De Raedt, L. (2023). Soft -unification in deep probabilistic logic.  Advances in neural 

information processing systems, 36 , 60804 –60820. 

Mao, J., Qian, Y., Ye, J., Zhao, H., & Wang, Y. GPT -Driver: Learning to Drive with GPT. In  NeurIPS 2023 

Foundation Models for Decision Making Workshop .

Parameshwaran, A., & Wang, Y. (2024). Temporal Logic Guided Safe Navigation for Autonomous 

Vehicles.  IFAC -PapersOnLine, 58 , 1067 –1072. 

Peng, Y., Qin, Y., Tang, X., Zhang, Z., & Deng, L. (2022). Survey on image and point -cloud fusion -based 

object detection in autonomous vehicles.  IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems, 23 , 22772 –22789. 

Qian, T., Chen, J., Zhuo, L., Jiao, Y., & Jiang, Y. -G. (2024). Nuscenes -qa: A multi -modal visual question 

answering benchmark for autonomous driving scenario. In  Proceedings of the AAAI 

Conference on Artificial Intelligence  (Vol. 38, pp. 4542 –4550). 

Shinn, N., Cassano, F., Gopinath, A., Narasimhan, K., & Yao, S. (2023). Reflexion: Language agents with 

verbal reinforcement learning.  Advances in neural information processing systems, 36 , 8634 –

8652. 

Sima, C., Renz, K., Chitta, K., Chen, L., Zhang, H., Xie, C., Beißwenger, J., Luo, P., Geiger, A., & Li, H. 

(2024). Drivelm: Driving with graph visual question answering. In  European conference on 

computer vision  (pp. 256 –274): Springer. 

Song, Z., Yang, L., Xu, S., Liu, L., Xu, D., Jia, C., Jia, F., & Wang, L. (2024). Graphbev: Towards robust bev 

feature alignment for multi -modal 3d object detection. In  European Conference on 

Computer Vision  (pp. 347 –366): Springer. 

Sun, P., Kretzschmar, H., Dotiwalla, X., Chouard, A., Patnaik, V., Tsui, P., Guo, J., Zhou, Y., Chai, Y., & 

Caine, B. (2020). Scalability in perception for autonomous driving: Waymo open dataset. In 

Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition  (pp. 

2446 –2454). 

Tang, Y., He, H., Wang, Y., & Wu, J. (2024). Towards efficient multi -modal 3D object detection: 

Homogeneous sparse fuse network.  Expert Systems with Applications, 256 , 124945. 

Tian, X., Gu, J., Li, B., Liu, Y., Wang, Y., Zhao, Z., Zhan, K., Jia, P., Lang, X., & Zhao, H. (2025). DriveVLM: 

The Convergence of Autonomous Driving and Large Vision -Language Models. In  Conference 

on Robot Learning  (pp. 4698 –4726): PMLR. 

Wang, L., Zhang, H., Zhang, X., Fan, Y., Shi, L., Xie, T., Yang, L., & Xu, B. (2026). V2 

[jls -end -space/] -Fusion: Virtual voxel enhanced 4D radar -image feature fusion for 3D object 

detection.  Expert Systems with Applications, 299 , 130130. 

Wang, L., Zhang, X., Song, Z., Bi, J., Zhang, G., Wei, H., Tang, L., Yang, L., Li, J., & Jia, C. (2023). 

Multi -modal 3d object detection in autonomous driving: A survey and taxonomy.  IEEE 

Transactions on Intelligent Vehicles, 8 , 3781 –3798. 

Wang, P., Bai, S., Tan, S., Wang, S., Fan, Z., Bai, J., Chen, K., Liu, X., Wang, J., & Ge, W. (2024). Qwen2 -vl: 

Enhancing vision -language model's perception of the world at any resolution.  arXiv preprint 

arXiv:2409.12191 .

Wei, J., Wang, X., Schuurmans, D., Bosma, M., Xia, F., Chi, E., Le, Q. V., & Zhou, D. (2022). 

Chain -of -thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models.  Advances in neural 

information processing systems, 35 , 24824 –24837. 

Xu, Z., Zhang, Y., Xie, E., Zhao, Z., Guo, Y., Wong, K. -Y. K., Li, Z., & Zhao, H. (2024). Drivegpt4: 

Interpretable end -to -end autonomous driving via large language model.  IEEE Robotics and 

Automation Letters .

Yang, Z., Jia, X., Li, H., & Yan, J. (2023). Llm4drive: A survey of large language models for autonomous 

driving.  arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.01043 .

Yao, S., Zhao, J., Yu, D., Du, N., Shafran, I., Narasimhan, K. R., & Cao, Y. (2022). React: Synergizing 

reasoning and acting in language models. In  The eleventh international conference on 

learning representations .

Yin, T., Zhou, X., & Krahenbuhl, P. (2021). Center -based 3d object detection and tracking. In 

Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition  (pp. 11784 –11793). 

Zheng, Y., Xing, Z., Zhang, Q., Jin, B., Li, P., Zheng, Y., Xia, Z., Zhan, K., Lang, X., & Chen, Y. (2024). 

PlanAgent: A Multi -modal Large Language Agent for Closed -loop Vehicle Motion Planning.