Title: The combinatorial game theory of Reverse Hex

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.22204v1

Published Time: Mon, 27 Apr 2026 00:25:25 GMT

Number of Pages: 76

Markdown Content:
# THE COMBINATORIAL GAME THEORY OF REVERSE HEX 

by Jeremiah Hockaday Submitted in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of Master of Science at Dalhousie University Halifax, Nova Scotia December 2025 

© Copyright by Jeremiah Hockaday, 2025 Table of Contents 

List of Figures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . vAbstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . vi List of Abbreviations and Symbols Used . . . . . . . . . . . . . . vii Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ix Chapter 1 Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1

1.1 How to play Hex and Rex . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21.1.1 Hex . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21.1.2 Rex . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3

Chapter 2 Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4

2.1 Posets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42.1.1 Monotone functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52.1.2 Some common posets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52.1.3 Some important monotone functions . . . . . . . . . . 62.2 Combinatorial Game Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6

Chapter 3 Some properties of Rex and related games . . . 14 

3.1 Games like Rex . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14 3.2 Properties of Rex . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16 3.2.1 Parity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16 3.2.2 ∗-Antimonotonicity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16 3.2.3 Premotivity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19 

Chapter 4 Games over posets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22 

4.1 Evaluating completions of a region . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22 ii 4.2 Positions and their game forms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25 4.3 Games over posets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27 

Chapter 5 Evaluating games . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31 

5.1 The contextual order . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31 5.2 The intrinsic order . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33 5.3 Intrinsic order and sum . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36 5.4 Intrinsic order and monotone functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37 

Chapter 6 Properties of Rex revisited . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39 

6.1 Parity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39 6.2 ∗-Antimonotonicity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41 6.3 Premotivity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42 

Chapter 7 The intrinsic and contextual order, united . . . . 49 

7.1 Intrinsic implies contextual . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49 7.2 Contextual implies intrinsic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52 

Chapter 8 Canonical forms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53 

8.1 Domination . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54 8.2 Reversibility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56 8.3 Canonical Forms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 60 

Chapter 9 Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64 

9.1 Analysis of large games of Rex . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64 9.2 Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65 iii Bibliography . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 67 

iv List of Figures 

1.1 An empty Hex (or Rex) board. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21.2 An example game of Hex (or Rex). . . . . . . . . . . . 22.1 A large game of Rex. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 92.2 Large game of Rex, piecemeal. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 92.3 The poset of outcomes o(G). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12 4.1 A small region embedded in a larger Rex board. . . . . 22 4.2 Completions of a region with two cells. . . . . . . . . . 23 4.3 Left wins with x y and loses with x y . . . . . . . . 24 4.4 Two adjacent empty cells. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24 4.5 Poset formed by two empty cells. . . . . . . . . . . . . 24 4.6 The boolean poset B. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25 4.7 Another three terminal region. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26 4.8 Positions of the region in Figure 4.1. . . . . . . . . . . 27 vAbstract 

Rex, short for Reverse Hex, is a set coloring game in which players try to avoid connecting terminals of their color. Combinatorial game theory (CGT) is the study of perfect strategy games. Until recently, both Rex and Hex were not examined through the lens of CGT. In this thesis we take inspiration from the study of normal play games by Berlekamp, Conway, and Guy, along with the combinatorial game theory of Hex developed by Selinger, to develop methods for analyzing Rex positions. We explore how to tell if one position is preferable to another, how to simplify positions, and some special properties of Rex (and antimonotone set coloring games in general). By the end of this thesis we will be able to take a position in a game of Rex, break it into smaller positions, analyze each of the smaller positions, then add the results back together to more easily determine who wins and loses the larger position. vi List of Abbreviations and Symbols Used 

CGT Combinatorial game theory. Rex Reverse Hex. 

≤A The order given a poset A (page 4). 

≃ Preorder equivalence or the intrinsic equivalence (see pages 4, 33). 

≤o, ≃o Order based on outcome classes (see page 16). 

≤c, ◁c, ≃c The contextual order (see page 31). 

∼= Isomorphism of posets (see page 5). 2X The poset formed by the subsets of X (see page 5). 

B The boolean poset (see page 5). 

1 The one element poset (see page 5). 

⊥ The least element of a poset (see page 5). 

⊤ The greatest element of a poset (see page 5). hom( A, B ) Morphisms from A to B (see page 5). 

A⋆ Shorthand for hom( A, B) (see page 5). 

aop Elements of the dual of a poset (see page 5). 

f op The dual of a function (see page 5). 

Gop The dual of a game (see pages 10, 29). 

λ, ρ, and , or Special functions between posets (see page 6). 

G, GL, GR,{︁ GL | GR}︁ Typical game form (see pages 6, 26). 

G + H Sum of games (see pages 6, 28). 

oL(G), oR(G), o(G) (Left, right) outcome class of G (see page 11). 

L , N , P , R Outcome classes (see page 11). a A black stone labeled a.vii a A white stone labeled a.a An empty cell labeled a.

∗ A dead cell (see page 19) and its game form (see page 41). [a] Atomic game (see page 26). 

f (G) Image of a game via a monotone function (see page 28). 

G +f H Shorthand for f (G + H) (see page 28). 

Gop +λ H The comparison game between G and H (see page 30). viii Acknowledgements 

I would like to thank my lovely supervisors Svenja Huntemann and Peter Selinger, without whom I could not have written this thesis. I would also like to thank all of my friends at Dalhousie, without whom I could not have 

stopped to take a break. Most importantly, I give thanks to my wonderful mother Angela, who inspired my love of learning at a young age and has always supported me in my endeavors. ix Chapter 1 Introduction 

Combinatorial Game Theory (CGT) is the study of two player perfect infor-mation games with no randomness. The goal of CGT research is to simplify the process of determining who is winning and losing at any given point of a game. It has been used for the study of normal play games (games where the winner is the person who moves last) to great success. Over the course of some games the board divides into disjoint regions. When this happens, it is useful to analyze these disjoint regions separately and “add” them back together. The basic idea of CGT is to find a way to add games together, to define a notion of equivalence on games, and to develop methods for simplifying games. We assign values to these games, called the canonical form of a game, which helps us reason about them more easily. When we can split a game into multiple smaller games, the canonical form of each of these pieces can be found, and the simplified pieces can be added together. Being able to do this can dramatically reduce the amount of time required to compute who wins and loses in the larger game. There has been research in developing the combinatorial game theory of games with rulesets other than normal play, such as mis` ere games, where the last player to make a move loses , and scoring games, where points are assigned to both players and the player with the most points at the end of the game wins (see [5] for more information on mis` ere and scoring games). Recently, Peter Selinger has developed the combinatorial game theory of Hex [7]. First, we give some background on concepts we will use in this paper, in-cluding posets and conventions of CGT. Afterwards we review some properties of Rex that are highlighted in this thesis, as well as some generalizations of Rex. In Chapter 4 we discuss how to interpret the outcome of one region of a 12Rex board using posets. Then in Chapter 5 we define what it means for one game to be better than another game. We will define this in two ways, called the contextual order and the intrinsic order. Next, in Chapter 6 we discuss special properties of Rex, such as premotivity and ∗-antimonotonicity. After-wards in Chapter 7 we prove that the contextual order is equivalent to the intrinsic order when restricted to a special class of games. Finally, in Chap-ter 8 we prove that every finite game within this special class of games has a unique canonical form, i.e., a unique smallest game that is equivalent to it. 

1.1 How to play Hex and Rex 1.1.1 Hex 

Figure 1.1: An empty Hex (or Rex) board. Hex is a board game played on a parallelogram like the one in Figure 1.1. The board consists of hexagonal cells and four colored terminals, two black and two white. We will call the players Left and Right. Left must play one black stone in an unoccupied cell on her turn, and Right must place one white stone on his turn. The game ends when no moves remain. If the two black terminals (the top and bottom of the board in Figure 1.1) are connected by black stones, then Left wins. If the two white terminals are connected by white stones, then Right wins. 123456789Figure 1.2: An example game of Hex (or Rex). Figure 1.2 shows an example game of Hex. The stones are labeled in 3the order in which they were played (Left started by playing in the upper-left corner, then Right played in the lower-right corner, etc). With the cells labeled 4,8, and 2, we see that Right has connected the two white terminals with white stones and has won. 

1.1.2 Rex 

Reverse Hex, often shortened to Rex, is played in the same way as Hex, with Left and Right taking turns placing black and white stones, respectively, until the board is full. However, at the end of a game of Rex, Left loses if her two black terminals are connected by black stones, and Right loses if his two white terminals are connected by white stones. For an example game of Rex, we can look at Figure 1.2 again. Here, we see that Left has won this game because Right’s two terminals are connected and Left’s two terminals are not. Note that we have defined the rules of Rex (and Hex) so that the game only ends when both boards are completely filled. This convention is convenient for the theory we develop in this thesis. In practice, the players will stop playing as soon as one of them has made a connection, because the winner can no longer change after this point. Chapter 2 Background 

2.1 Posets 

In this thesis we will use posets as a basis for our game forms. In light of this, in this section we provide some of the definitions and conventions for posets that we will use. 

Definition 2.1. A partially ordered set , or poset , is a set A with a relation 

≤A ⊆ A × A such that the following hold: 1. ( Reflexivity ) For all a ∈ A, it must be that a ≤A a.2. ( Antisymmetry ) Given any two elements a, b ∈ A, if a ≤A b and b ≤A a

then a = b.3. ( Transitivity ) Given any three elements a, b, c ∈ A, if a ≤A b and b ≤A c

then a ≤A c.When it is clear what poset we are dealing with, we will omit the A and write a ≤ b.Let A be a poset, and let A′ be a subset of A. Then A′ forms a poset with the induced order, i.e., ≤A′ = ≤A ∩ (A′ × A′). Let A and B be two posets. The Cartesian product A × B forms a poset with the componentwise order: namely, (a1, b 1) ≤A×B (a2, b 2) ⇐⇒ a1 ≤A a2 and b1 ≤B b2.

In a poset, we write x < y when x ≤ y and x̸ = y.A preordered set P is defined similarly to how a poset is defined, but the relation on a preordered set does not need to be antisymmetric. This means 45that there can be two elements x, y ∈ P such that x ≤ y and y ≤ x and x̸ = y.Whenever P is a preordered set, we can define an equivalence relation on P .We say x ≃ y whenever x ≤ y and y ≤ x. Then the quotient set P/ ≃ is partially ordered. 

2.1.1 Monotone functions Definition 2.2. Let A and B be posets and let f be a function from A to B.We say f is monotone if it preserves the order, i.e., 

∀x, y ∈ A, x ≤A y ⇒ f (x) ≤B f (y).

Two posets A and B are isomorphic to each other if there exist monotone functions f : A → B and g : B → A such that f and g are mutual inverses. We denote this as A ∼= B.

2.1.2 Some common posets 

Given any set X, we use 2 X to denote the set of subsets of X. This forms a poset under the subset relation ⊆.The boolean poset B has two elements, ⊥ and ⊤, with ⊥ ≤ ⊤ . We some-times think of ⊥ and ⊤ as the boolean values false and true , respectively. The poset 1 has only one element, and we refer to its only element as 0. When dealing with posets, 1 is the multiplicative identity with respect to the Cartesian product, i.e., A × 1 is isomorphic to A for all posets A. Because of this, we often identify A × 1 with A.For two posets A and B, let hom( A, B ) be the set of monotone functions from A to B. We can turn hom( A, B ) into a poset: we say f ≤hom( A,B ) g if 

f (x) ≤B g(x) for all x in A.Later on we will frequently refer to the poset hom( A, B). We will refer to it as A⋆.Every poset A mentioned throughout this thesis will also have a greatest 

and least element. We denote the greatest element, called top , by ⊤, and 6we denote the least element, called bottom , by ⊥. For any x in A, we have 

⊥ ≤ x ≤ ⊤ .Given a poset A, we define the poset Aop to be the set A with the ordering 

b ≤Aop a whenever a ≤A b. When convenient, we may write aop and bop to represent elements of Aop , so that bop ≤ aop if and only if a ≤ b. Note that (A × B)op = Aop × Bop .If f : A → B is a monotone function, then we define f op : Aop → Bop to be the function such that f op (xop ) = f (x)op for all x in A.

2.1.3 Some important monotone functions 

We would like to define a function c : A × A → B that compares two elements of a poset, i.e., c(x, y ) = ⊤ if and only if x ≤ y. Unfortunately, c is not a monotone map. For example, let y and z be elements of A such that y < z .Then ( y, y ) ≤ (z, y ), but c(y, y ) = ⊤ and c(z, y ) = ⊥.To fix this, we need our map to go from Aop × A to B. We define λ as follows: λ(xop , y ) = ⊤ if and only if x ≤A y. It can be shown that λ is a monotone function. Similarly, we define ρ : A × Aop → B by ρ(x, y op ) = ⊤ if and only if x ≰ y.Note that, because B is isomorphic to Bop , the function ρ is essentially the same as λop .We define and and or to be the logical operations as maps from B × B to 

B. These are both monotone functions. 

2.2 Combinatorial Game Theory 

Combinatorial game theory (CGT) is the study of perfect strategy games: two player games without hidden information or randomness. At its core, CGT is about developing ways to break a game into small parts, “simplify” them, and add the results together. The definition we give excludes hidden infor-mation games like Battleship and rock-paper-scissors, as well as games based 7on chance like Poker, Snakes and Ladders, and Ludo. Another requirement that our games must satisfy is the infinite descending game condition. This states that all games must end after a finite number of moves. CGT has been used to study popular games such as Chess , Checkers (Draughts) , Man-cala , Go and Tic-Tac-Toe . Some combinatorial games, such as variations of NIM , have been studied since the early 1900’s [2]. The combinatorial game theory developed herein is derived from Berlekamp, Conway, and Guy’s re-search on normal play games in the 1970’s [1], as well as the work of Selinger in 2022 [7]. In CGT, games are often classified by how a winner is decided. These include normal play games (in which a player loses if they cannot move on their turn), mis` ere play (in which a player wins if they cannot make a move on their turn), and scoring games (in which the winner is whoever gets the highest score). Normal play games, also known as Conway games, have been extensively studied because of their nice structure. In the following paragraphs we will use normal play games to showcase important concepts in CGT, and we outline how this may be adapted to non-normal play games like Rex. The main references we use for this section are [1], [3], and [6]. In CGT, the word ruleset refers to the rules and structures of a game, while a position refers to a state that is achievable under the given ruleset. The term game form , often just called a game , is a recursive way of describing a position. As mentioned before, all combinatorial games are played by two players. There are many conventions for what these two players are called: Alice and Bob, Louise and Richard, Blue and Red, etc. In this thesis we name these players Left and Right .In every position, there is a set of moves that Left can make and a set of moves that Right can make. The game form G of a position P is a pair of sets { L | R }, where every X ∈ L is the game form of a position Left could reach if they made a move in the position P . The set R is defined similarly for Right. We call every element of L a left option of G, and the elements of 

R are the right options of G. We say that G′ is a follower of G if G′ is G8itself, any option of G, or (recursively) if G′ is a follower of some option of G.Informally, a follower is any potential state of the game reachable from G.In this thesis we will use a few notational conventions that are common in CGT. For instance, we denote a game { { W, X } | { Y, Z } } by { W, X | Y, Z },separating the individual elements with commas. When convenient, we write 

G ={︁ GL | GR}︁ , where GL denotes a typical left option of G and GR denotes a typical right option of G. We use this notation even when G has more than one left or right option. The simplest Conway game is the game with no left options and no right options. This game, called 0, can be represented as 0 = { | }.There are many ways of adding two games in CGT. In this thesis we will only be using the disjunctive sum of games. When we take the disjunctive sum of two normal play games G and H, we define this as 

G + H ={︁ GL + H, G + HL | GR + H, G + HR}︁ .

Informally, we think of this as playing both games at the same time. On Left’s turn they chose to make a move in G or make a move in H, and similarly for Right. The game 0 acts as an identity for the disjunctive sum: For any normal play game G, the game G + 0 is the same as the game G.Figure 2.1 depicts a Rex position. Say we wanted to determine if Left has a first player winning strategy from this point in the game. There are 10 empty cells left on the board. Left starts with 10 options of where to move, then Right has 9 options remaining, then Left has 8, and so on, meaning the number of ways the game could play out is 10!, or 3 , 628 , 800. We will adapt ideas from combinatorial game theory to make analyzing games like this simpler. First, notice that playing the game in Figure 2.1 is equivalent to playing the disjunctive sum of the three games with gluing instructions (see Figure 2.2). The games G1, G2, and G3 have 3, 3, and 4 empty cells, respectively. It is clear that 4! + 3! + 3!, or 36, is much smaller than 10!. By analyzing G1, G 2, and G3

separately and adding/gluing the results together, we can reduce computation 9time drastically. Figure 2.1: This game of Rex is already too big to analyze by hand... 

G1 G2 G3

Figure 2.2: ... but breaking the game into smaller pieces aids computation. Often in this paper, we will use a proof technique known as Conway in-duction. Below we will state the Conway induction theorem for normal play games: 

Theorem 2.3 (Conway induction) . Let P be a property that a game can have. Suppose that, given a game G, if P (G′) is true for all left options and all right options G′ of G, then P (G) is true. Then P (G) is true for all games G.Proof. Let P be as above, and suppose there is a game G such that P (G) is false. Then there must be some left option or right option G(1) of G such that 

P (G(1) ) is false. Then there must be some left or right option G(2) of G(1) 

such that P (G(2) ) is false. Continuing like this we find that for any n there exists a descendant G(n+1) of G(n), which violates the infinite descending game condition that we placed on normal play games. This is a contradiction, so 

P (G) must be true. 10 A more general version of this theorem can be found in [6]. In Chapter 4 we will prove a version of this theorem which is more appropriate for Rex. In CGT, we orient everything through the eyes of Left. Thus, when we say something is better, we mean better for Left. Sometimes we want to make a claim from Right’s perspective. When this is necessary, we use the the dual of the game, denoted by Gop , in which Left and Right switch sides. 

Definition 2.4 (Dual of a game) . Let G ={︁ GL | GR}︁ be some game. The 

dual of the game G is called Gop , and is defined as Gop ={︁ (GR)op | (GL)op }︁ .Given any concept, property, or proof in CGT, there is a dual concept in which the roles of Left and Right are swapped. For example, take the definition of Left having a first and second player winning strategy: 

Definition 2.5 (First and second player winning strategy for Left) . We define a first (second) player winning strategy for Left recursively as follows: 

• Left has a first player winning strategy in a game G if Left has an option 

GL of G such that Left has a second player winning strategy in GL.

• Left has a second player winning strategy in a game G if, for every right option GR of G, Left has a first player winning strategy in GR.This definition begets a dual definition in which Left and Right swap places: 

• Right has a first player winning strategy in a game G if Right has an option GR of G such that Right has a second player winning strategy in 

GR, and 

• Right has a second player winning strategy in a game G if, for every Left 

option GL of G, Right has a first player winning strategy in GL.In this thesis we will not explicitly state the dual of a concept/property/proof when its dual follows naturally. Note that Left has a first player winning strategy if and only if Right does not have a second player winning strategy, which can be proved using Conway induction. 11 In CGT we care about the outcome class of a game, i.e., who wins under optimal play when going first and who wins when going second. We break this up into left and right parts: 

Definition 2.6 (Left and right outcome classes) . The left outcome class of G,denoted by oL(G), is defined as follows: 

• oL(G) = ⊤ when Left has a winning strategy with Left going first, and 

• oL(G) = ⊥ when Right has a winning strategy with Left going first. The right outcome class of G, denoted by oR(G), is defined as follows: 

• oR(G) = ⊤ when Left has a winning strategy with Right going first, and 

• oR(G) = ⊥ when Right has a winning strategy with Right going first. To know who wins going first and who wins going second, it is sufficient to know oL(G) and oR(G). We define outcome classes as follows: 

Definition 2.7 (Outcome class) . The outcome class of a game G, denoted by 

o(G), is 

• o(G) = L if ( oL(G), o R(G)) = ( ⊤, ⊤), i.e., Left has a first and second player winning strategy in G.

• o(G) = N if ( oL(G), o R(G)) = ( ⊤, ⊥), i.e., Left and Right both have a first player winning strategy in G.

• o(G) = P if ( oL(G), o R(G)) = ( ⊥, ⊤), i.e., Left and Right both have a second player winning strategy in G.

• o(G) = R if ( oL(G), o R(G)) = ( ⊥, ⊥), i.e., Right has a first and second player winning strategy in G.We can think of o(G) as a function which sends a game to B × B. Then we can turn the outcome classes into a poset, as in Figure 2.3. This gives us the following lemma: 12 

Lemma 2.8. Let G and H be games. Then o(G) ≤ o(H) if and only if both of the following hold: 

• if Left has a first player winning strategy in G then Left has a first player winning strategy in H, and 

• if Left has a second player winning strategy in G then Left has a second player winning strategy in H.

L

N P

R

Figure 2.3: The poset of outcomes o(G). If G and H are normal play games, we say G ≤ H if, for all normal play games X,

o(G + X) ≤ o(H + X).

It turns out that G ≤ H if and only if Left has a second player winning strategy in the game Gop + H. We write this recursively as follows: 

Definition 2.9 (Order on normal play games) . We define the two relations, 

≤ and ◁, on normal play games by mutual induction. We say G ≤ H when Left has a second player winning strategy in Gop + H,i.e., when all of the following hold: 1. GL ◁ H for all GL, and 2. G ◁ HR for all HR.We say G ◁ H when Left has a first player winning strategy in Gop + H,i.e., when at least one of the following hold: 1. there exists some GR such that GR ≤ H, or 13 2. there exists some HL such that G ≤ HL.We say that G and H are equivalent if G ≤ H and H ≤ G. This is not the same as saying two games are identical, by which we mean they are literally the same. Note that in CGT, it is common to say games are “equal” when they are merely equivalent. We will avoid this convention for the sake of clarity. Chapter 3 Some properties of Rex and related games 

The results about Rex that this thesis provides will also apply to more general games. Here we will discuss some special properties of Rex and we will describe some generalizations of the game that also have these properties. The rules of Rex were given in Section 1.1.2. 

3.1 Games like Rex 

One generalization of Rex called the reverse Shannon game is played on a graph. The rules are as follows: 

Definition 3.1 (Reverse Shannon game) . Let B be a finite graph with two distinguished vertices tN and tS . The vertices tN and tS are the called the 

north and south terminals, respectively. The other vertices are called cells .On a player’s turn they must choose one uncolored cell and color it. Left will color cells black, and Right will color cells white. At the end of the game, Left wins if and only if there is no black path between the north and south terminals, i.e., no path from tN to tS that only touches black cells. Here is an example of a reverse Shannon game’s graph: 

tN

tS

14 15 Rex is a special case of the reverse Shannon game. In fact, the above example is analogous to 3 × 3 Rex. There is a further generalization of Rex and of the reverse Shannon game, which is the antimonotone set coloring game . Recall that B is the set of booleans, and that 2 X is the poset formed by the subsets of some set X.

Definition 3.2 (Antimonotone set coloring game) . A set coloring game is given by a set X — whose elements we call cells — and a function f : 2 X → B,which is called a payoff function . On a player’s turn they must choose one uncolored cell. Left will color cells black, and Right will color cells white. Let 

L be the set of black cells at the end of the game. Left wins if and only if 

f (L) = ⊤.A set coloring game is antimonotone if f is an antimonotone function; in other words, for all subsets L and L′ of X, if L ⊆ L′ then f (L′) ≤ f (L). Every reverse Shannon game (and therefore every Rex game) is an anti-monotone set coloring game: for all subsets L of the cells X, f (L) = ⊤ if and only if there is no path from tN to tS passing only through cells in L.Every reverse Shannon game is antimonotone as well. However, not every antimonotone set coloring game can be expressed as a reverse Shannon game. For example, the game in which X is a set with 3 elements and f (L) = ⊤ if and only if |L| < 2 cannot be expressed as a reverse Shannon game: for every pair of cells, one must be connected to tN and the other must be connected to tS . This cannot be accomplished without one of the three cells being con-nected to both tN and tS , contradicting the assumption that Left wins if and only if |L| < 2. The combinatorial game theory developed in this paper applies to the class of antimonotone set coloring games. Most of the examples will be given in terms of Rex, but all of the statements remain true when considering this more general class of games. 16 

3.2 Properties of Rex 

We now introduce, by examples, three properties of Rex (and more generally, of antimonotone set coloring games): parity, ∗-antimonotonicity, and premo-tivity. These properties will play an important role in the combinatorial game theory we develop in later chapters. 

3.2.1 Parity 

We say that a Rex position is even if there is an even number of empty cells, and odd if there is an odd number of empty cells. The same definition applies to any set coloring game. Notice that if a player makes a move in an even position, the resulting position is odd, and vice versa. 

3.2.2 ∗-Antimonotonicity 

If G and H are positions in a set coloring game, we say that G ≤o H if 

o(G) ≤ o(H), i.e., if whenever Left has a first (respectively, second) player winning strategy in G, then Left also has a first (respectively, second) player winning strategy in H. We say that G ≃o H if G ≤o H and H ≤o G.In Hex, it is well known that Left always prefers a black stone to a white stone. It is convenient for us to represent this pictographically like so: 

≤o .

We call this property monotonicity . Hex also satisfies a stronger property, which we call strong monotonicity : In Hex, Left prefers a black stone in a cell over the cell being empty, and Left prefers a cell to be empty rather than the cell to have a white stone (see [7] for more information): 

≤o ≤o .

Naturally Rex is antimonotone , i.e., in Rex, Left always prefers a white stone to a black stone: 

≤o .17 Because Rex is the reverse of Hex, it is tempting to think that Rex is also strongly anti -monotone, i.e., 

≤o ≤o .

Perhaps surprisingly, this turns out to be false. For example, take the following game of Rex: 

G = x y

The position G has outcome class N : the player who goes first plays in cell 

x, and the other player must then play in cell y and lose. On the other hand, let G′ be the same as position G, but where x is already occupied by a black or white stone, so that y is the only empty cell in G′. Then G′ has outcome class P: whoever goes first loses. This shows that 

x y ≰o x y .

In particular, it shows that Rex is not strongly antimonotone. While we do not have strong antimonotonicity, we do have that two black stones are worse for Left than two empty cells, and two empty cells are worse for Left than two white stones, i.e., 

≤o ≤o . (3.1) The proof of this relies on the parity of the position not changing, along with the fact that Rex is antimonotone. We will prove that ≤o ,as the proof of ≤o is dual. Assume that Left has a (first or second player) winning strategy in a Rex position with black stones in two cells, labeled a and b . We want to show that Left has a (first/second player respectively) winning strategy in the position including a b . In this position, Left simply pretends both cells have black stones and follows their original strategy. If Right ever plays in one of these two cells, Left plays in the other cell, and their strategy continues as if both cells had black stones. If, on 18 Left’s turn, a and b are the only empty cells remaining, then Left plays in one and Right must play in the other. At the end of the game the board will be exactly the same as if Left had started with a and b , except one of these stones will be white instead. Because Rex is antimonotone, Left wins anyway. This fact implies a property of antimonotone set coloring games that is reminiscent of the strong monotonicity we see in Hex. First, in a set coloring game, we say that a cell is dead if, no matter how you fill the board, changing the color of that cell does not affect the winner. Dead cells, denoted by ∗, are useful in antimonotone games: playing in a dead cell is like passing your turn, forcing your opponent to move instead. If there is an even number of dead cells in a position, they can be ignored. To see why, take a Rex position with a cell that is not dead, which we will call 

x , along with two dead cells, ∗ and ∗ .By Equation (3.1) we have that 

x ∗ ∗ ≤o x ∗ ∗ ≤o x ∗ ∗ .

The color of a filled dead cell does not matter, so we can remove the filled stones to obtain: 

x ≤o x ∗ ∗ ≤o x ,

or in other words, 

x ≃o x ∗ ∗ . (3.2) While we do not have that ≤o ≤o in Rex, we do have the following property, which we call ∗-antimonotonicity :

x ∗ ≤o x ≤o x ∗ .

Informally, we are saying that the only time when Left would prefer an empty cell to a white stone is when Left wants to force Right to play somewhere else by limiting their options. Proof of ∗-antimonotonicity: take some empty cell in a position, denoted by x . Then we have the following: 

x ∗ ≃o x ∗ ∗ ≤o x ∗ ∗ ≃o x .19 The first equivalence holds because filled dead cells are inconsequential. The middle inequality holds by Equation (3.1), and the last equivalence holds by Equation (3.2). The proof of x ≤o x ∗ is dual. The game of Rex that we saw earlier has a dead cell as well: 

∗ y

The empty cell labeled ∗ has no way of reaching the northern black terminal, and all of the white stones around the cell are connected to each other already. Because of this the game’s outcome is unaffected by what color stone is in this cell at the end of the game, and so it is dead. 

3.2.3 Premotivity 

The discussion in this subsection applies to all set coloring games, whether they are antimonotone or not. 

Lemma 3.3 (Move pre-selection lemma) . In an even position with at least two empty cells, if the first player refuses to play in some cell x then their opponent will be forced to play in x by the end of the game. Proof. Without loss of generality, we consider the case where Left goes first. Suppose Left refuses to play in an arbitrary cell x . Since Left went first in an even position, Right will make the last move of the game, and so Right will be forced to play in x at the end if they have not already. This lemma tells us a lot about the power of parity in a game of Rex. This lemma leads us to another property that set coloring games have: 

Proposition 3.4 (Lookahead property) . If Left has a second player winning strategy in an even position, then Left also has a first player winning strategy. 20 

Proof. We note that, when analyzing a position with no empty cells, Left has a second player winning strategy if and only if Left has a first player winning strategy. Suppose that Left has a second player winning strategy in an even game. Then Left can win as first player by doing the following. First, Left picks an arbitrary empty cell x on the board and pretends that Right has played there. Left then plays what their second player winning strategy suggests in response to this imagined move by Right. Of course, Left’s strategy never requires her to play in x because it assumes Right has already played there. By Theorem 3.3 she forces Right to play to x at some point in the game. Once Right has played x , the resulting even position will be as if Left had in fact gone second with Right playing x first. If the new position has no empty cells, then she has won via their second player winning strategy. If this new position has empty cells remaining, then Left picks another arbitrary empty cell and repeats this process until the game ends. Many of the results in this thesis will require that our games satisfy The-orem 3.4. Recall that, in combinatorial game theory, there is a well known concept called the copycat strategy . Here is a story that illustrates how the copycat strategy works. Suppose Alice is playing two games of Rex simul-taneously, one against Bob and one against Charlie. Both games are played starting from identical positions. In her game against Bob she is playing the black stones, and in her game against Charlie she plays the white stones. Alice waits for Charlie to make his first move. After this, because both positions are identical, Alice can copy the move Charlie made onto Bob’s board. This means that the new positions are identical after Alice copies this move. Whenever Bob makes a move Alice copies it in Charlie’s game, and whenever Charlie makes a move Alice copies it in Bob’s game. By following this strategy Alice can force the two boards to be identical at the end of play. Then Bob wins if and only if Charlie loses, so Alice must have won at least one of the games. Note that Alice’s copycat strategy does not require Bob and Charlie to be uncoordinated. The copycat strategy works even if Bob and Charlie play as a 21 team — which we will refer to as Charboblie — to defeat Alice. Therefore, we can think of Alice as playing a single set coloring game against Charboblie. More precisely, let us write G to refer to the set coloring game Bob plays against Alice, and Gop to refer to the set coloring game that Charlie plays against Alice (which is the same as G except the colors have been switched). Let Gop + G be the set coloring game played on the union of the two boards, in which Alice wins if and only if she can win in G or Gop by the end of the game. Alice’s second player copycat strategy still allows her to win in the game 

Gop + G. The games G and Gop each have n empty cells, so Gop + G must have 2n empty cells, meaning the sum is an even position. By using Theorem 3.4, we see that Alice has a first player copycat strategy as well! First player copycat strategies are very uncommon in combinatorial games. It is remarkable that all set coloring games have this property. We say that a game G is premotive if Left has a first player winning strategy in the game 

Gop +G. We will give a more formal definition of premotivity in Theorem 4.10. Chapter 4 Games over posets 

4.1 Evaluating completions of a region 

Almost all definitions in combinatorial game theory are recursive. This means that, to define what game forms for some region of a Rex board should look like, we have to start with the base cases: all the ways to completely fill said region. 132132Figure 4.1: A small region embedded in a larger Rex board. Take the region of the board shown in Figure 4.1. It has 2 empty cells, meaning there are 2 2 = 4 ways of filling the region with black or white stones. We call these the completions of the region. Looking at Figure 4.2, we see that 

x y is worse for black than x y : in x y the bordering black cells 1 , 2 , and 3 are connected, while in x y they are disconnected. Say we were to embed the region R into any large board X that is already completely filled with black and white stones. If Left wins in the game X(R) with the com-pletion x y , then there must not be a path going from the positive terminal to the negative terminal. When changing both black stones to white stones, this fact remains unchanged. This is the inspiration for the following order on completions of a region: 22 23 1

x y 32 

> xy

1

x y 32 

> xy

1

x y 32 

> xy

1

x y 32 

> xy

Figure 4.2: The four completions of the region in Figure 4.1. 

Definition 4.1 (Order on completions of a region) . Let R be a region of a Rex board, and let a and b be two completions of R. We say that a ≤ b

as completions of R if, for all larger boards X to embed R into and for all completions x of X, if Left wins in x(a), then Left wins in x(b). We say that 

a ≃ b, or a is equivalent to b, when a ≤ b and b ≤ a.The order on completions of a region is a preorder, i.e., it is transitive and reflexive but it is not always anti-symmetric (for example, x y ≃ x y in Figure 4.2). To make this into a poset, we will look at the completions up to equivalence. We call the poset formed by the completions modulo equivalence the outcome poset .Let us finish comparing the completions of the region from Figure 4.1. The completion x y connects 1 and 2 while x y does not. Because of this, if 

R is plugged in to a larger board X with a completion x of X such that 1 is connected to the northern terminal and 2 is connected to southern terminal, as in Figure 4.3, then Left wins in the game x( x y ) and loses in the game 

x( x y ). This means that x y ≰ x y . With similar reasoning it can be shown that x y is equivalent to x y . Thus, there are only three outcomes of R up to equivalence, and they form the poset x y ≤ x y ≤ x y .Not all regions are bounded by stones like the region in Figure 4.1. For example, Figure 4.4 shows a region of a Reverse Hex board with two empty cells and no stones along its border. Again there are 2 2 = 4 ways this region 24 132   

> x(xy)

1

3

2   

> x(xy)

Figure 4.3: Left wins with x y and loses with x y .Figure 4.4: Two adjacent empty cells. could be filled. However, x y and x y are not equivalent in this region, so the outcome poset is the four element poset shown in Figure 4.5. 

⊤

xy

⊥

Figure 4.5: The poset formed by two empty cells, ordered by preference. As mentioned on the previous page, given a region of a Rex board, the poset formed by its completions modulo equivalence is called the outcome poset of the region. For a game G with a outcome poset A, we say that G is played over A.As discussed in the section about posets, we will use ⊤ to refer to the best outcome for Left and ⊥ to refer to the worst outcome for Left. Note that filling every empty cell with white stones is certainly the best completion for Left, and filling every empty cell with black stones is certainly the worst for Left. The simplest example of an outcome poset is that of the region with one empty cell and no boundary conditions. The two completions of this region naturally form the boolean poset B (see Figure 4.6). 25 

⊤

⊥

Figure 4.6: The boolean poset B.We now have the tools necessary to find the outcome poset of the region 

G2 from Figure 2.2: 

G2

This is an example of a 3-terminal region, i.e., a region with three black ter-minals and three white terminals. There are at most five completions of a 3-terminal region up to equivalence. The outcome ⊤ represents no two black terminals being connected, and the outcome ⊥ represents when all three black terminals are connected by black stones. The other outcomes arise from the three ways Left can connect two of the three terminals together. The outcome poset of G2 is shown in Figure 4.7, along with an example of each outcome. 

4.2 Positions and their game forms 

Now that we have an understanding of the possible completions of a region at the end of play, we need a treatment of a region in the midst of play. Given a region, a position of the region is any way one can assign the available cells to have a black stone, a white stone, or to be empty. With three possible states for each available cell in a region, that means a region with n available cells has 3n positions. For example, the nine positions in the region from Figure 4.1 are shown in Figure 4.8. All positions also come with a game form , a description 26 

⊤

a b c

⊥

Figure 4.7: The outcome poset of a 3-terminal region of what moves either player can make starting from that position. A position is called atomic if it contains no empty cells, i.e., if it is a completion for the region. 

Definition 4.2 (Game form of a position) . Let R be a region, and let P

be some position in the region R. If P is not atomic, then the game form 

G = { L | R } of P is a pair of sets L and R, which are the sets of the game forms of the positions that Left/Right respectively can reach in one move from position P . If the position P is atomic, then the game form G of P is just the element of the outcome poset of R which corresponds to that completion. This recursive definition is similar to the definition for normal play games. As an example, consider the region R from Figure 4.1. Let us write x y

when both cells are empty, and so on. From the position x y Left could move to x y or x y and Right could move to x y or x y . The game form of x y is {︁ x y | x y}︁ 

because x y and x y are both completions of R. The game form of x y

is {︁ x y | x y}︁ . For x y and x y the game forms are {︁ x y | x y}︁ 

and {︁ x y | x y}︁ respectively. Then the game form of the position x y

is {︂{︁ 

x y | x y}︁ ,{︁ x y | x y}︁ |{︁ x y | x y}︁ ,{︁ x y | x y}︁}︂ .27 

x y 

> xy

x y 

> xy

x y 

> xy

x y 

> xy

x y 

> xy

x y 

> xy

x y 

> xy

x y 

> xy

x y 

> xy

Figure 4.8: The nine positions of the region in Figure 4.1. 

4.3 Games over posets 

For the rest of this thesis we will focus on game forms over arbitrary posets. We define the class of game forms over some poset as follows: 

Definition 4.3 (Game forms over a poset) . Fix a poset A, called the outcome poset . The class of game forms over A is the smallest class satisfying: 1. for all a ∈ A, [ a] is a game form. 2. Whenever L and R are non-empty sets of game forms, then { L | R } is a game form. We will use the usual terminology and notations of combinatorial game theory. When no confusion arises, we simply refer to a game form as a game . A game of the form [ a] is called an atomic game . We often just write a instead of [a]: the notation [ a] is used for operations on games that translate to operations on the poset. A game of the form { L | R } is called a composite game , and the elements of L and R are called its left and right options, respectively. We will often write G ={︁ GL | GR}︁ to represent a game, where GL is a typical left 28 option of G and GR is a typical right option of G. Then we use “for all GL”to mean “for all left options GL of G,” and similarly for right options. When a game is known to be atomic, we often write it in lowercase. We sometimes use G : A to denote that G is a game over the poset A.For example, let ⊥ ≤ h ≤ ⊤ be a poset. This poset is isomorphic to the outcome poset of the region from Figure 4.1, where x y maps to ⊥, x y

maps to h, and x y and x y both map to ⊤. Then 

{ { ⊥ | ⊤ } , { ⊥ | h } | { ⊤ | ⊤ } , { h | ⊤ } } 

is another representation of the game form of the empty position in this region. There are game forms that cannot be realized as a position of some Rex region. For example, let G be the game form G = { ⊤ | ⊥ } over some poset 

A. If we wanted to find a Rex position with this game form, we would need a position with one empty cell remaining such that filling the cell with a black stone is winning for Left and filling the cell with a white stone is winning for Right. This is impossible because Rex is antimonotone (see Theorem 3.2). 

Definition 4.4 (Sums of games) . Let G be a game over the poset A, and let 

H be a game over the poset B. The game G + H is over the poset A × B and is defined as follows: 

• If [ g] and [ h] are atomic, then [ g] + [ h] = [( g, h )]. 

• If G is composite and h is atomic, then G + h ={︁ GL + h | GR + h}︁ .

• If g is atomic and H is composite, then g + H ={︁ g + HL | g + HR}︁ .

• Otherwise, G + H ={︁ GL + H, G + HL | GR + H, G + HR}︁ .Note that, when both games are composite, this definition agrees with the definition of the disjunctive sum on normal play games. This sum is also associative: ( G + ( H + K)) = (( G + H) + K). 

Definition 4.5 (Map operation) . Let ϕ : A → B be a monotone function and let G be a game over A. Then ϕ(G) is a game over B, defined as follows: 29 

• If [ g] is atomic, then ϕ([ g]) = [ ϕ(g)] 

• If G is composite, then ϕ(G) = {︁ ϕ(GL) | ϕ(GR)}︁ .Let f : A × B → C be a monotone function where A, B, and C are posets. Often in this thesis we will apply f to the sum G + H, with G and H being games over A and B, respectively. We write G+f H as shorthand for f (G+H). Similarly to normal play games the dual of a game G, denoted by Gop ,refers to the game G where Left and Right have swapped places. Right wants what Left does not: if Left believes outcome a is worse than outcome b, then Right prefers outcome a over outcome b. Because of this, if G is over some poset A then Gop is over Aop . We define this formally as follows: 

Definition 4.6 (Dual game) . Let G be a game over a poset A. If G is composite, then the dual of G is Gop ={︁ (GR)op | (GL)op }︁ . If [ g] is atomic, then [ g]op = [ gop ], where gop is the corresponding element of Aop .We often write GLop and GRop without parenthesis. Note that, when G is composite, the definition of Gop aligns with the normal play definition. 

Definition 4.7 (First and second player winning strategy for a game over B).

Let G be a game over B.

• Left has a first player winning strategy in G if there is some GL of G

such that Left has a second player strategy in GL or [g] is atomic and 

g = ⊤.

• Left has a second player winning strategy in G if Left has a first player winning strategy in GR for all GR of G and, if [ g] is atomic, then g = ⊤.

Theorem 4.8 (Induction on games over posets) . Let P be a property of games over some poset A. Suppose that P (g) is true for all atomic games g ∈ A and suppose that, given a composite game G, if P (G′) is true for all left options and right options G′ of G, then P (G) is true. Then P (G) is true for all games 

G over A.30 

Proof. Let P be a property as defined above and let C be the class of all games that satisfy P . By assumption the game [ x] is in C for all x ∈ A and the game 

G = { L | R } is in C for any two non-empty sets of games L and R in C.We defined the class of games over the poset A to be the smallest class which satisfies the above conditions (see Theorem 4.3). Then the class of games over 

A is contained in C, which implies P (G) is true for all G over A.In Section 3.2.3 we informally defined the property of premotivity . Now we define this formally. Given two games G and H over the poset A, we refer to Gop +λ H as the comparison game , where λ is the comparison function defined in Section 2.1.3. The game that Alice played against Charboblie can be written as Gop +λ G , where Bob’s board is G and Charlie’s board is Gop .We can prove that the second player copycat strategy holds for all games over posets: 

Proposition 4.9 (Second player copycat strategy) . Let G be a game over a poset A. Then Left has a second player winning strategy in the game Gop +λ G.Proof. Assume [ g] is an atomic game. Then gop +λ g is equal to ⊤ because A

is reflexive. Now assume G is composite. By the induction hypothesis, Left has a second player winning strategy in the game ( G′)op +λ G′ for all left or right options G′

of G. If Right moves to Gop +λ GR, then Left copies, moving to ( GR)op +λ GR.If Right moves to ( GL)op +λ G, then Left copies, moving to ( GL)op +λ GL. So Left has a first player winning strategy in the games Gop +λ GR and ( GL)op +λ G

for all GL and GR of G. Therefore Left has a second player winning strategy in the game Gop +λ G, as desired. 

Definition 4.10 (Premotivity) . We say that a game G is premotive if Left has a first player winning strategy in the game Gop +λ G.In Chapter 6 we will prove that premotive games satisfy the lookahead property (see Theorem 3.4). Chapter 5 Evaluating games 

In normal play games, we say that G ≤ H if Left would prefer H over G in any game that can be written as G+X, where X is some other game. Because the game X can be thought of as a context in which to play G or H, we call this the contextual definition of the ≤ relation. As we saw in Theorem 2.9, in the case of normal play games, there is also an equivalent intrinsic definition of the ≤ relation, i.e., one that does not refer to any contexts. For our games over posets, the situation is slightly more complicated. We will define a contextual order in Section 5.1 and an intrinsic order in Sec-tion 5.2. These orders will not be equivalent over the class of all games, but they will become equivalent when restricted to a special subclass of games. 

5.1 The contextual order 

We want to define something similar to the contextual order on games over a poset A. Informally we say G is less than or equal to H contextually , denoted by G ≤c H, if Left would prefer H over G regardless of the context, i.e., whatever is happening on the rest of the board. Let A be a poset and recall that A⋆ is the poset of monotone functions from A to B (see Section 2.1). We define ε : A × A⋆ → B to be the application function, where 

ε(a, f ) = f (a).

When embedding a Rex position into the completion of a larger board, we can think of this completion as an element of A⋆. Because of this, we define a context to be a game X over A⋆. Then the game G +ε X is the game G

embedded into the game X. From here on, when we add a game to a context 31 32 will write G + X, omitting the ε.

Definition 5.1 (Contextual order on games) . Let G and H be games over some poset A.

• We say G ≤c H if o(G + X) ≤ o(H + X) for all contexts X.

• We say G ◁c H if oR(G + X) ≤ oL(H + X) for all contexts X.We say that G is contextually equivalent to H, denoted by G ≃c H, if 

G ≤c H and H ≤c G. The contextual relation ≤c is transitive and reflexive, so it forms a preorder on the set of games. In fact, we also have that G ≤c H ◁c K

implies G ◁c K and G ◁c H ≤c K implies G ◁c K. It is also clear that 

G ≤c H implies G + K ≤c H + K for any game K.With this definition we can already prove some results about games that we might expect. The following lemma is an example of this. Informally, the lemma says that replacing a left option of a game with something better is always good for Left. 

Lemma 5.2. Suppose H ≤c K.If G ={︁ GL, H | GR}︁ and G′ ={︁ GL, K | GR}︁ , then G ≤c G′.Proof. We will show this by proving the following two claims using induction on X:(A) oL(G + X) ≤ oL(G′ + X) and (B) oR(G + X) ≤ oR(G′ + X). We will prove claim (A) first. Assume Left has a first player winning strategy in the game G + X. Then there must be some ( G + X)L such that Left has a second player winning strategy in ( G + X)L. We want to show that Left has a first player winning strategy in the game G′ + X. If ( G + X)L is of the form 

G + XL for some XL of X, then Left can copy that move in G′ + X. By the induction hypothesis, o(G + XL) ≤ o(G′ + XL). Then Left has a second player winning strategy in G′ + XL.33 If ( G + X)L is of the form GL + X for GL̸ = H, then Left can just move to GL + X in the game G′ + X. Finally, assume ( G + X)L is of the form 

H + X. Because H ≤c K, we know that o(H + X) ≤ o(K + X). Then Left moves to the game K + X in the game G′ + X. Then we have shown that 

oL(G + X) ≤ oL(G′ + X). Now we will prove claim (B). Assume Left has a second player winning strategy in the game G + X. Then for all ( G + X)R of G + X Left has a first player winning strategy in ( G + X)R. We want to show that Left has a first player winning strategy in ( G′ + X)R for all ( G′ + X)R of G′ + X.The Left’s first player winning strategy in GR + X can be copied directly because the right options of G and G′ are the same. Assume Right moves to some G′ +XR of G′ +X. By the induction hypothesis o(G+XR) ≤ o(G′ +XR), so Left has a first player winning strategy in G′ + XR. Therefore, Left has a second player winning strategy in G′ + X, as desired. 

5.2 The intrinsic order 

The contextual order is a valid order to impose on games over posets, but it is difficult to verify. It is not reasonable to write a program that checks if 

o(G + X) ≤ o(G + X) for all contexts X because there are infinitely many contexts X. As is usual in CGT, we would like an order on games which is equivalent to the contextual order and does not refer to contexts. 

Definition 5.3 (Intrinsic order on games over a poset) . Let G and H be games over the same poset A. We say G ≤ H when all of the following hold: 1. For all left options GL of G, we have GL ◁ H, and 2. for all right options HR of H, we have G ◁ HR, and 3. if G = g, H = h are atomic games, then g ≤A h.We say G ◁ H when at least one of the following holds: 34 1. There exists some GR of G such that GR ≤ H, or 2. there exists some HL of H such that G ≤ HL.We say that G ≃ H, or G is intrinsically equivalent to H, when G ≤ H and 

H ≤ G.

Proposition 5.4. Given two games G and H over the same poset, we have the following: (A) G ≤ H if and only if Left has a second player winning strategy in the comparison game Gop +λ H in which Left makes the last move. (B) G ◁ H if and only if Left has a first player winning strategy in Gop +λ H

in which Left makes the last move. Proof. Let G and H be two games over some poset A. We will prove both claims by simultaneous induction on the games G and H.First, we will prove claim (A). Assume G ≤ H. If G = g and H = h are both atomic, then by the definition of λ Left has already won the game gop +λ h.Now assume that G and H are not both atomic. We want to prove that Left has a second player winning strategy in the comparison game Gop +λ H in which Left makes the last move. The options of Gop +λ H which Right can move to are either of the form GLop +λ H or of the form Gop +λ HR. By the definition of G ≤ H, for all GL of G and HR of H we have GL ◁ H and 

G ◁ HR, respectively. Using part (B) of the induction hypothesis, this implies that in every right option of the game Gop +λ H there is a first player winning strategy for Left in which Left makes the last move. This means Left has a second player winning strategy in the game Gop +λ H in which Left makes the last move. Next we assume that, in the game Gop +λ H, Left has a second player winning strategy in which they make the last move. We want to prove that 

G ≤ H. Let GL be some left option of G. The game GLop +λ H is a right option of Gop +λ H, so Left must have a first player winning strategy in which 35 Left moves last. Then using part (B) of the induction hypothesis, we have that GL ◁ H. By the same argument we see that G ◁ HR for all right options 

HR of H. If the game Gop +λ H is atomic, then g and h must be atoms and 

g ≤ h. Then we have that G ≤ H as desired. Now we will prove claim (B). Assume G ◁ H. Either there exists some GR

of G such that GR ≤ H or there exists some HL of H such that G ≤ HL. Both 

GRop +λ H and Gop +λ HL are left options of the game Gop +λ H. Then using part (A) of the induction hypothesis, there exists a left option of Gop +λ H in which Left has a second player strategy to win and make the last move. Then in the game Gop +λ H Left has a first player strategy to win and make the last move, as desired. Finally, assume that in the game Gop +λ H Left has a first player strategy to win and make the last move. We want to show that G ◁ H. Note that “Left has the last move” means that Left always has a move on their turn. Then G and H cannot both be atomic, because Left would have no move to make. Then there must be some left option of Gop +λ H where Left has a second player strategy to win and make the last move. That left option will either be of the form GRop +λ H or of the form Gop +λ HL. Using part (A) of the induction hypothesis, we see that either there exists some GR of G such that GR ≤ H or there exists some HL of H such that G ≤ HL. This means that G ◁ H as desired. 

Corollary 5.5. Let G and H be games over the same poset A. Then G ≤ H

if and only if ⊤ ≤ Gop +λ H, and G ◁ H if and only if ⊤ ◁ Gop +λ H.Proof. As shown above, G ≤ H if and only if Left has a second player strategy in the game Gop +λ H to win and make the last move. That must be true if and only if Left has a second player strategy in the game ⊤op +λ (Gop +λ H)to win and make the last move, which is true if and only if ⊤ ≤ Gop +λ H, as desired. The proof that G ◁ H if and only if ⊤ ◁ Gop +λ H is similar. 36 Ideally, we would like to have that G ≤ H if and only if G ≤c H. Unfor-tunately, this is not always the case. As it stands, this intrinsic relation is not even transitive. For example, we have: 

⊤ ≤ { { ⊥ | ⊥ } | { ⊤ | ⊤ } } ≤ ⊥ . (5.1) We will spend the next few chapters looking at properties which the game form of any Rex position (and more generally, any set coloring game with antimono-tone payoff function) has. These are the properties of parity, premotivity, and 

∗-antimonotonicity that we already gave examples of in Chapter 3. It turns out that the class of premotive games with parity is well-behaved: on it, the intrinsic order is transitive and coincides with the contextual order. Also, this class of games admits canonical forms. 

5.3 Intrinsic order and sum 

The following proposition shows that the intrinsic order is preserved by sum-mation. 

Proposition 5.6. For games G and G′ over some poset A and games H and 

H′ over some poset B, all of the following hold: (A) If G ≤ G′ and H ≤ H′, then G + H ≤ G′ + H′.(B) if G ◁ G′ and H ≤ H′, then G + H ◁ G′ + H′.(C) if G ≤ G′ and H ◁ H′, then G + H ◁ G′ + H′.Proof. Let G and G′ be games over the poset A and let H and H′ be games over the poset B. We will prove these claims using joint induction. First we will prove claim (A). Assume that G ≤ G′ and H ≤ H′. We want to show that G + H ≤ G′ + H′. If g, h, g′, and h′ are all atomic, then (g, h ) ≤A×B (g′, h ′) as desired. Suppose at least one of the games is not atomic. To show G + H ≤ G′ + H′, we will need to show that ( G + H)L ◁ G′ + H′ for all left options ( G + H)L of G + H and that G + H ◁ (G′ + H′)R for all right 37 options ( G′ + H′)R of G′ + H′. We start by proving the first part; take some left option of G + H, of the form GL + H. Because G ≤ G′, we know that 

GL ◁ G for all left options GL of G. By part (B) of the induction hypothesis, 

GL ◁ G′ and H ≤ H′ implies GL + H ◁ G′ + H′. Now take a left option of the form G + HL. Similarly, by using part (C) of the induction hypothesis, we have that G ≤ G′ and HL ◁ H implies G + HL ◁ G′ + H′. This proves that (G + H)L ≤ G′ + H′ for any left option ( G + H)L of G + H, as desired. We omit the proof of the second claim because it is dual to the proof above. Next we will prove claim (B). Assume that G ◁ G′ and H ≤ H′. Because 

G ◁ G′, either there exists some GR of G such that GR ≤ G′ or there exists some G′L of G′ such that G ≤ G′L. In the first case, GR ≤ G′ and H ≤ H′

implies GR + H ≤ G′ + H′ by the induction hypothesis, which implies that 

G + H ◁ G′ + H′. In the second case, G ≤ G′L and H ≤ H′ implies that 

G + H ≤ G′L + H′ by part (A) of the induction hypothesis, which implies that 

G + H ◁ G′ + H′.The proof of (C) is symmetric to the proof of (B). 

5.4 Intrinsic order and monotone functions 

The next two propositions show that the intrinsic order behaves as expected with respect to monotone functions applied to games. 

Proposition 5.7. Let G and H be games over some poset A, and let ϕ and 

ψ be monotone functions from the poset A to some other poset Z. If ϕ ≤ ψ

and G ≤ H, then ϕ(G) ≤ ψ(H).Proof. Assume G and H are games over the poset A, and ϕ : A → Z and 

ψ : A → Z are monotone functions such that ϕ ≤ ψ. We will prove the following claims by induction on G and H:(A) If G ≤ H, then ϕ(G) ≤ ψ(H). (B) If G ◁ H, then ϕ(G) ◁ ψ(H). 38 First we prove claim (A). If g and h are atomic, then ϕ(g) ≤ ψ(h) by assumption. Assume G or H is composite. Let GL be some left option of G.We know that GL ◁ H, so by the induction hypothesis, ϕ(GL) ≤ ψ(H). Let 

HR be some right option of H. By dual reasoning, ψ(G) ◁ ϕ(HR). Then 

ϕ(G) ≤ ψ(H) as desired. Now we prove claim (B). Assume G ◁ H. Without loss of generality, assume there exists some HL of H such that G ≤ HL. Then by the induction hypothesis, ϕ(G) ≤ ψ(HL). Then we have proved that ϕ(G) ◁ ψ(H). 

Proposition 5.8. Let G be a game over some poset A, and let ϕ and ψ be monotone functions from the poset A to some other poset Z. Suppose ϕ ≤ ψ.Then we have the following: (A) If ⊤ ≤ ϕ(G), then ⊤ ≤ ψ(G).(B) If ⊤ ◁ ϕ(G), then ⊤ ◁ ψ(G).Proof. Assume G is a game over A and ϕ and ψ are defined as above. We will prove both claims using induction on G.First we will prove claim (A). If g is atomic, then ⊤ ≤ ψ(g) by the transi-tivity of posets. Assume G is composite. The game ⊤ has no options, so we only need to show that ⊤ ◁ ψ(GR) for all GR of G. Because ⊤ ≤ ϕ(G), we know that ⊤ ◁ ϕ(GR). This means that ⊤ ◁ ψ(GR) by using part (B) of the induction hypothesis. This is true for any GR of G, therefore ⊤ ≤ ψ(G). Now we prove claim (B). Assume ⊤ ◁ ϕ(G). Because the game ⊤ has no options, there must exist some GL of G such that ⊤ ≤ ϕ(GL). Using part (A) of the induction hypothesis, this implies that ⊤ ≤ ψ(GL) for that same GL.Therefore, ⊤ ◁ ψ(G). Chapter 6 Properties of Rex revisited 

In this chapter, we will demonstrate how to extend some of the special prop-erties of Rex (as discussed in Chapter 3) to arbitrary games over a poset. 

6.1 Parity Definition 6.1 (Parity of a game) . We say that a game is even if all of its options are odd. We say that a game is odd if it is composite and all of its options are even. A game has parity if it is even or odd. Note that some games, such as { ⊥ | { ⊤ | ⊤ } } , are neither even nor odd. 

Lemma 6.2. Let G, H, and K be games over some poset A, and suppose G

and K have parity. Then: (A) If G ≤ H ≤ K, then G and K have matching parity. (B) If G ≤ H ◁ K, then G and K have mismatching parity. (C) If G ◁ H ≤ K, then G and K have mismatching parity. Proof. Let G, H, and K be as described above. We will prove all four claims using induction on G, H, and K.First we prove claim (A). Suppose G ≤ H ≤ K. If G = [ g] and K = [ k] are both atomic, then they automatically have matching parity. Then assume G

or K is composite. If G is composite, then we have GL ◁ H ≤ K. By part (B) of the induction hypothesis we know GL and K have mismatching parity. We know G and GL have mismatching parity, so G and K have matching parity, as desired. Similar reasoning applies when K is composite. 39 40 Now we will prove claim (B). Suppose that G ≤ H ◁ K. Because H ◁ K,either there exists some HR of H such that HR ≤ K or there exists some KL

of K such that H ≤ KL.If there is some HR of H such that HR ≤ K, then G ◁ HR ≤ K. Then, by part (C) of the induction hypothesis, we know that G and K have mismatching parity. If instead there is some KL such that H ≤ KL, then we have that 

G ≤ H ≤ KL. Using part (A) of the induction hypothesis we get that G and 

KL have matching parity. Then G and K must have mismatching parity, as desired. The proof of claim (C) is similar to that of claim (B). From this we get the following corollary: 

Corollary 6.3. If G ≤ H and both have parity, then they have matching parity. If G ◁ H and both have parity, then they have mismatching parity. 

This corollary also holds with respect to the contextual order: 

Lemma 6.4. Suppose G and H are games with parity. If G ◁c H, then G

and H have mismatching parity. If G ≤c H, then G and H have matching parity. Proof. Let G and H be defined as above. First, suppose G ◁c H. We want to show that G and H cannot have matching parity. Suppose that both G and H are even. Let X = { ⊥ | ⊤ } ,where ⊥ and ⊤ are both constant functions which send everything in A to ⊥

and ⊤, respectively. Clearly the first player to play in X loses. Then because both games are even, Left always has a second player winning strategy in 

G + { ⊥ | ⊤ } and Left never has a first player winning strategy in the game 

H + { ⊥ | ⊤ } , contradicting our assumption. For similar reasons using the game X = { { ⊥ | ⊤ } | { ⊥ | ⊤ } } , we can prove that G and H cannot both be odd. This means G and H must have mismatching parity. Now, suppose G ≤c H. When both games are atomic, they immediately have matching parity. 41 First, assume H is composite. We must have that oR(G+X) ≤ oL(HR +X)for all right options of H. By the proof of the first claim, G ◁c HR implies that G and HR have mismatching parity. The games HR and H must have mismatching parity by definition, therefore G and H have matching parity. The proof is dual when G is composite and h is atomic. When turning a Rex position into a game, the parity of the position is determined by whether there is an even or odd number of empty cells remaining in the position. Because of this, we have the following corollary: 

Corollary 6.5. Let G be a game that is intrinsically equivalent to a position in Rex. Then G must have parity. 

Lemma 6.6. Let G be an even game over a poset A. Then ⊥ ≤ G ≤ ⊤ .Proof. First, we note that this statement is true by definition when g is atomic. We will only prove that ⊥ ≤ G, as the proof that G ≤ ⊤ is dual. Assume 

G is composite and even. Let GR be a right option of G. Because GR is odd, there must be a left option ( GR)L of GR. By the induction hypothesis, 

⊥ ≤ (GR)L. Then ⊥ ◁ GR. This is true for all right options of G. The game 

⊥ has no left options. Therefore ⊥ ≤ G as desired. 

6.2 ∗-Antimonotonicity 

Recall that 1 = { 0 } is the one-element poset. As discussed in Section 2.1, for any poset A we have that A × 1 ∼= A. Because these are isomorphic, we usually say that ( a, 0) = a. Let [0] be the unique atomic game over 1. Then for all games G we have G = G + 0. We also use ∗ to denote the game { 0 | 0 }. Recall the definition of a dead cell from Section 3.2.2: A cell whose state does not affect the outcome of the game. Since a black stone is equivalent to a white stone in this cell, the outcome poset should be 1. Then the game ∗ represents a single dead cell. We have that ∗ + ∗ ≃ 0 as well, which can be checked by hand. 42 

Remark 6.7. If G is even, then G + ∗ is odd, and vice versa. Also, since 

∗ + ∗ ≃ 0 we have G + ∗ + ∗ ≃ G by Theorem 5.6. By mirroring what we did in Section 3.2.2 we have the following definition: 

Definition 6.8 (∗-antimonotonicity) . A game G is locally ∗-antimonotone if 

GL + ∗ ≤ G ≤ GR + ∗

for all left and right options of G. A game is ∗-antimonotone if it and all of its followers are locally ∗-antimonotone. In Section 3.2.2 it was shown that Rex positions are ∗-antimonotone, and a counterexample to the claim GL ≤ G ≤ GR was given. In fact, by Theorem 6.3 we know that GL ≰ G ≰ GR for all left and right options of G when G has parity. 

Lemma 6.9. If G is a ∗-antimonotone game, then G has parity. Proof. We will prove our claim using induction on G.All atomic games are even, and hence have parity. Then assume G is a composite ∗-antimonotone game. By the induction hypothesis, all options of 

G have parity. In fact, all GL + ∗ and all GR + ∗ have parity. Then by Theorem 6.2, the inequality GL + ∗ ≤ G ≤ GR + ∗ implies that, for all GL

and all GR of G, we have GL + ∗ and GR + ∗ have matching parity. Then GL

and GR have matching parity. This means that all options of G have the same parity. Therefore G has parity, as desired. 

6.3 Premotivity Definition 6.10 (Premotivity) . A game G is locally premotive if Left has a first player winning strategy in the comparison game Gop +λ G (or dually if Right has a first player winning strategy in the game G +ρ Gop ). A game is 

premotive if it and all of its followers are locally premotive. 43 This is a property that all set coloring games have, as seen in Section 3.2.3. Premotivity is also preserved by addition, a property that will be useful to us later. 

Proposition 6.11. If G and H are premotive, then G + H is premotive. Proof. We start by assuming G and H are premotive, which implies that Left has a first player winning strategy in the games Gop +λ G and Hop +λ H. By using the copycat strategy, we can show that Left also has a second player winning strategy in both games. We want to show that Left has a first player winning strategy in the game ( G + H)op +λ (G + H). By the definition of the Cartesian product of posets, the game ( G + H)op +λ (G + H) is identical to (Gop +λ G) + and (Hop +λ H). We want to show that Left has a first player winning strategy in this game. Their strategy is as follows; Left sets out to play their first player winning strategy in the Gop +λ G component of the game. If Right decides to respond in the Hop +λ H component of the game, then Left responds with their copycat strategy. If Right plays in the Gop +λ G component of the game Left will follow their second player winning strategy in ( Gop +λ G)L. Play will continue until Right makes the last move in that section, after which Left will make the first move in some H′op +λ H′, where H′ is either H or some follower of H. All followers of H are also premotive by definition, and so Left will have a first player winning strategy in the game H′op +λ H′ as well. This fully describes Left’s first player winning strategy in the game ( Gop +λ G)+ and (Hop +λ H). We will now show that premotive games satisfy the lookahead property (see Theorem 3.4). 

Proposition 6.12. If G and H are even games over B and Left has a first player winning strategy in Gop +λ H, then a second player winning strategy in 

G implies a first player winning strategy in H.Proof. We will prove the following three claims using joint induction on G and 

H:44 (A) If G and H are even and Left has a first player winning strategy in the game Gop +λ H, then the existence of a second player winning strategy for Left in G implies that there is a first player winning strategy for Left in H.(B) If G is odd, H is even, and Left has a second player winning strategy in 

Gop +λ H, then the existence of a first player winning strategy for Left in 

G implies that there is a first player winning strategy for Left in H.(C) If G is even, H is odd, and Left has a second player winning strategy in 

Gop +λ H, then the existence of a second player winning strategy for Left in G implies that there is a second player winning strategy for Left in H.First, we will prove claim (A). Assume G and H are even, and that Left has a first player winning strategy in the comparison game Gop +λ H. If g and h

are atomic, then a first player winning strategy for Left in gop +λ h means that 

g ≤ h. A first player winning strategy for Left in the atomic game g means that ⊤ = g. Then, by transitivity of posets, ⊤ = h as well. This implies Left has a second player winning strategy in the game h, as desired. Now assume that G and H are not both atomic, and that Left has a second player winning strategy in the game G. Because Left has a first player winning strategy in the game Gop +λ H, there must be a left option of the game in which Left has a second player winning strategy. Suppose Left’s winning move is of the form GRop +λ H for some left option 

GRop of Gop (recall that the left options of Gop are of the form GRop ). By assumption Left has a first player winning strategy in this game GR, so by the induction hypothesis Left must have a first player winning strategy in the game H.Suppose instead that Left’s winning move is of the form Gop +λ HL for some HL of H. Left has a second player winning strategy in the game G by assumption, so by the induction hypothesis, Left must have a second player winning strategy in the game HL, which implies they have a first player win-ning strategy in the game H.45 Next we will prove claim (B). Assume that G is odd, that H is even, that Left has a second player winning strategy in the comparison game Gop +λ H,and that Left has a first player winning strategy in the game G. This means there exists some GL of G such that Left has a second player winning strategy in the game GL. If Right were to move to GLop +λ H, Left must have a first player winning strategy in this game as well. Then by the induction hypothesis, Left has a first player winning strategy in H.The proof of (C) is similar to the proof of (B). The lookahead property states that, if some player has a second player winning strategy in an even game G, then they have a first player winning strategy in G. The previous proposition begets the following corollary: 

Corollary 6.13. Let H be a game over B. If H is even and premotive and Left has a second player winning strategy in H, then there is a first player winning strategy for Left in H.

Lemma 6.14. If G ≃c H and G is locally premotive, then H is locally pre-motive. Proof. Assume G ≃c H and G is locally premotive. Then because G ≃c H

(and, dually, because Gop ≃c Hop ), we have 

o(Gop +λ G) = o(Gop +λ H) = o(Hop +λ H).

Because G is locally premotive, o(Gop +λ G) = L, so o(Hop +λ H) = L. Then Left has a first player winning strategy in the game Hop +λ H, meaning H is locally premotive. Recall that and and or are the usual boolean functions. By Theorem 4.4 and Theorem 4.5, + and and + or denote two different ways of taking the dis-junctive sum of games over B. Specifically, to win the game G +and H, Left must win both components, whereas to win G +or H, it is sufficient for Left to win one component. 46 

Lemma 6.15. Given G, H, J, and K games over a poset A, we have that 

⊤ ≤ (Gop +λ H) + and (Jop +λ K) implies ⊤ ≤ (Gop +λ K) + or (H +ρ Jop ).Proof. Assume g, h, j, and k atoms and assume that ⊤ ≤ (gop +λ h) + and 

(jop +λ k). This implies g ≤ h and j ≤ k. We want to prove that either g ≤ k

or h̸ ≤ j.Suppose h ≤ j. Then g ≤ h ≤ j ≤ k implies g ≤ k. Then we have shown that, if g ≤ h and j ≤ k, then g ≤ k or h ≰ j. This implies that 

⊤ ≤ (gop +λ k) + or (h +ρ jop ). The rest of the lemma follows by Theorem 5.8. 

Lemma 6.16. Let G be a game over B, and let H be a premotive game over any poset. Then the following two statements are true: (A) If ⊤ ≤ G +or (H +ρ Hop ), then ⊤ ≤ G.(B) If ⊤ ◁ G +or (H +ρ Hop ), then ⊤ ◁ G.Proof. Let G and H be defined as above. We prove both claims using induction on games G and H.First we prove claim (A). Assume that g is atomic. We want to show that 

⊤ ≤ g. From Theorem 7.1 we see that ⊤ ≤ g +or (H +ρ Hop ) implies Left has a second player winning strategy in the game g +or (H +ρ Hop ). Because H is premotive, Right has a first player winning strategy in the game ( H +ρ Hop ), so Left cannot have a second player winning strategy in it. Then it must be that the game g is already greater than or equal to ⊤.Now assume that G is composite. It must be that, for all right options GR

of G, we have ⊤ ◁ GR +or (H +ρ Hop ). Then by the induction hypothesis, we have that ⊤ ◁ GR for any right option GR of G, which implies ⊤ ≤ G.Finally we prove claim (B). Assume that ⊤ ◁ G +or (H +ρ Hop ). We want to show that ⊤ ◁ G. Left has some move in either G or H such that ⊤ ≤ 

(G +or (H +ρ Hop )) L. If that move is of the form ⊤ ≤ GL +or (H +ρ Hop ), then by part (A) of the induction hypothesis we have that ⊤ ≤ GL, which implies 47 

⊤ ◁ G. If Left’s move is of the form ⊤ ≤ G +or (HL +ρ Hop ), then because 

HLop is a right option of Hop we must have that ⊤ ◁ G +or (HL +ρ HLop ). Because H is premotive, all of its options are as well. Then by part (B) of the induction hypothesis, we have that ⊤ ◁ G. Similarly, if Left’s move is of the form ⊤ ≤ G +or (H +ρ HRop ), then we get ⊤ ◁ G +or (HR +ρ HRop ) and by part (B) of the induction hypothesis we get that ⊤ ◁ G.Recall from the counterexample in Equation (5.1) that the intrinsic order is not always transitive. One of the most important consequences of premotivity is that the intrinsic order is transitive on the class of premotive games. 

Theorem 6.17. Suppose G, H, and K are games over the same poset and H

is premotive. Then the following three statements hold: (A) If G ≤ H ≤ K, then G ≤ K.(B) If G ◁ H ≤ K, then G ◁ K.(C) If G ≤ H ◁ K, then G ◁ K.Proof. First we prove (A). Assume G ≤ H and H ≤ K. From this, we know that ⊤ ≤ Gop +λ H and ⊤ ≤ Hop +λ K by Theorem 5.5. The games ⊤,

Gop +λ H, and Hop +λ K are over the boolean poset, so the function () + and () can be used to add them together. Then by Theorem 5.6, we have 

⊤ ≤ (Gop +λ H) + and (Hop +λ K).

Then by Theorem 6.15, we have 

⊤ ≤ (Gop +λ K) + or (H +ρ Hop ).

Because H is premotive, we then have ⊤ ≤ Gop +λ K by Theorem 6.16. This implies that G ≤ K as desired. The proofs of (B) and (C) are similar. We finish this section with some properties that relate premotivity and 

∗-antimonotonicity. 48 

Lemma 6.18. Let G and H be premotive games. Then G + ∗ ≤ H if and only if G ≤ H + ∗.Proof. First, assume G+∗ ≤ H. Then by Theorem 5.6 we have that G+∗+∗ ≤ 

H + ∗. Both G and ∗ + ∗ are premotive, so by Theorem 6.11 G + ∗ + ∗ is premotive. Because G + ∗ + ∗ is premotive and G + ∗ + ∗ ≃ G, we have that 

G ≤ H + ∗ by Theorem 6.17. The proof of the opposite implication is dual. 

Proposition 6.19. Let G and H be ∗-antimonotone and premotive games over some poset A. Then G ◁ H if and only if G ≤ H + ∗.Proof. Because H is a right option of H + ∗, G ≤ H + ∗ implies G ◁ H.Because of this, we will only prove that G ◁ H implies G ≤ H + ∗.Assume that G ◁ H. This means either there exists some HL of H such that G ≤ HL or there exists some GR of G such that GR ≤ H. Assume there is an HL as described above. Because H is ∗-antimonotone, we have 

G ≤ HL ≤ H + ∗.

Because H and all of its followers are premotive, we have transitivity through 

HL, giving us that G ≤ H + ∗.Assume there is a GR as described above. Because G is ∗-antimonotone, we have 

G + ∗ ≤ GR ≤ H. 

Because GR is premotive, we have that G + ∗ ≤ H. As shown earlier, this is equivalent to saying G ≤ H + ∗.

Corollary 6.20. Let G and H be ∗-antimonotone and premotive games. Then 

G ◁ H if and only if G + ∗ ≤ H.Proof. This follows directly from Theorem 6.19 and Theorem 6.18. Chapter 7 The intrinsic and contextual order, united 

We saw in Equation (5.1) a counterexample to the claim that the intrinsic order was transitive for all games. This already tells us that the contextual order ≤c

and the intrinsic order ≤ are not equivalent for all games. In this section, we will show that they coincide when restricted to the class of premotive games with parity. 

7.1 Intrinsic implies contextual Lemma 7.1. If ⊤ ≤ G, then Left has a second player winning strategy in G,and if ⊤ ◁ G, then Left has a first player winning strategy in G.Proof. We prove both statements by using joint induction on G:To prove the first statement, let G be a game such that ⊤ ≤ G. If g is atomic, then ⊤ ≤ g implies that Left has a first and second player winning strategy in g, because the game is already finished. Assume G is composite, and let GR be some right option of G. Then 

⊤ ◁ GR. By the induction hypothesis, this implies that Left has a first player winning strategy in GR. This argument holds regardless of which GR we consider. Then Left has a first player winning strategy in every right option of G, which implies that Left has a second player winning strategy in G.Now we prove the second statement. Let G be a game such that ⊤ ◁ G.Because ⊤ has no right options, there must exist some GL of G such that 

⊤ ≤ GL. By the induction hypothesis, Left has a second player winning strategy in GL, which implies that Left has a first player winning strategy in 

G.49 50 

Theorem 7.2. For games G and H that are premotive and have parity, if 

G ≤ H, then G ≤c H.Proof. To show this, we will prove the following three claims using joint in-duction on G, H, and X. Let G and H be games over some poset A and let 

X be a game over A⋆. Assume that G and H are premotive and have parity. We will prove the following three statements by joint induction on G, H, and 

X:(A) If G ≤ H and Left has a first player winning strategy in G + X, then Left has a first player winning strategy in H + X.(B) If G ◁ H and Left has a second player winning strategy in G + X, then Left has a first player winning strategy in H + X.(C) If G ≤ H and Left has a second player winning strategy in G + X, then Left has a second player winning strategy in H + X.Together, claims (A) and (C) imply that o(G + X) ≤ o(H + X), which proves 

G ≤c H.We will begin by proving claim (A). Assume that G ≤ H and Left has a first player winning strategy in the game G + X. If g and x are atomic, then it must be that ⊤ ≤ x(g). Because x is a monotone function, g ≤ H implies that 

x(g) ≤ x(H). Because all atomic games are premotive, we can use transitivity to say that ⊤ ≤ x(H). By Theorem 7.1, ⊤ ≤ x(H) implies Left has a second player winning strategy in x(H). Since g ≤ H and H has parity, H is even by Theorem 6.3. Hence x(H) is even as well. Because H is premotive, we also have that x(H) is premotive. Then by Theorem 6.13 Left must have a first player winning strategy in x(H), as desired. Now assume that G and X are not both atomic. There must exist some (G + X)L in which Left has a second player winning strategy. First assume this is a move in X, resulting in G + XL. Then because G ≤ H and because Left has a second player winning strategy in the game G + XL, Left must have a second player winning strategy in the game H + XL by part (C) of the 51 induction hypothesis. Therefore, Left has a first player winning strategy in the game H + X.Now assume Left’s move was not in X, but rather to some GL of G. Because 

G ≤ H, we know GL ◁ H. Then because GL ◁ H and because Left has a second player winning strategy in the game GL + X, Left must have a first player winning strategy in the game H + X by part (B) of the induction hypothesis. Now we will prove claim (B). Assume that G ◁ H and Left has a second player winning strategy in G + X.To say G ◁ H is to say that either there exists some GR such that GR ≤ H

or there exists some HL such that G ≤ HL. First, suppose there exists some 

GR such that GR ≤ H. Because Left has a second player winning strategy in 

G + X, Left must have a first player winning strategy in the game GR + X.This implies Left has a first player winning strategy in the game H + X by part (A) of the induction hypothesis. Now suppose there exists some HL such that G ≤ HL. Then Left has a second player winning strategy in the game 

HL + X by part (C) of the induction hypothesis, which means Left has a first player winning strategy in the game H + X.Finally, we prove claim (C). Assume that G ≤ H and Left has a second player winning strategy in the game G + X. When h and x are both atomic, the proof is dual to that of claim (A). Assume H and X are not both atomic. We want to show that Left has a second player winning strategy in the game H + X. Consider some some right option of H + X. If this right option is of the form H + XR, then Left must have a first player winning strategy in the game G + XR. Then by part (A) of the induction hypothesis, Left has a first player winning strategy in H + XR.If this right option is of the form HR + X, then because G ≤ H we know 

G ◁ HR. Then by part (B) of the induction hypothesis, Left has a first player winning strategy in HR + X. Then Left has a second player winning strategy in H + X, as desired. 52 

7.2 Contextual implies intrinsic Theorem 7.3. If G and H have parity, then G ≤c H implies G ≤ H.Proof. Assume that G and H have parity and that G ≤c H. By Theorem 6.4, we know G and H must have matching parity. Left certainly has a second player winning strategy in the game Gop +λ G, that being the copycat strategy. Because G ≤c H, Left also has a second player winning strategy in Gop +λ H.This implies G ≤ H by Theorem 5.4. Theorem 7.2 and Theorem 7.3 come together as the following corollary: 

Corollary 7.4. Let G and H be games over some poset A. If both G and H

are premotive and have parity, then G ≤ H if and only if G ≤c H.Chapter 8 Canonical forms 

In Combinatorial Game Theory, the number of followers a game has heavily impacts how easy it is to analyze a position. Let G be a game over some poset 

A, and let X be a game over the poset A⋆. Suppose G has nG left options and 

mG right options, and X has nX left options and mX right options. Then the game G + X will have nG + nX left options and mG + mX Right options. If G is contextually equivalent to an atomic game h, then h + X has as many left/right options as X has. The game h + X will even have the same number of followers as X. Because G and h are contextually equivalent, we have that G + X ≃c h + X and o(G + X) = o(h + X). This means we can analyze the behavior of G + X while doing only a fraction of the work. Now let G be the set of games that are contextually equivalent to G. We can order this set by how many followers each game has. A canonical form 

of a game G is an element of the set G with the fewest followers. The games that we are working with only have finitely many followers, so we know that for any game there exists a collection of canonical forms. In this chapter we will demonstrate how to find these canonical forms and we will prove that, for finite premotive games with parity, there is always a unique canonical form. Moreover, if G is also ∗-antimonotone, then its canonical form is as well. 

Lemma 8.1. Let G and H be premotive games such that G ≃ H. If G and all the options of H are ∗-antimonotone, then H is ∗-antimonotone. Proof. Let G and H be premotive games such that G ≃ H, and assume that 

G and all the options of H are ∗-antimonotone. We want to show that H is 

∗-antimonotone. Let HL be some left option of H. Because H ≤ G, it must be that HL ◁ G. By assumption, both HL and G are ∗-antimonotone and 53 54 premotive, so by Theorem 6.20 we have HL + ∗ ≤ G. Since G is premotive, we have that HL + ∗ ≤ G ≤ H implies HL + ∗ ≤ H by transitivity. Then we have 

HL + ∗ ≤ H for all left options HL of H. We have H ≤ HR + ∗ for all right options HR of H for similar reasons. Therefore H is ∗-antimonotone. 

Lemma 8.2 (Gift Horse Lemma) . Let G, H, and G be games over some poset 

A and let G′ ={︁ GL | GR}︁ and G ={︁ H, G L | GR}︁ . Then G′ ≤c G and 

G′ ≤ G.Proof. The proof of this follows from the definition of ≤.

8.1 Domination 

One way to simplify a game is to ignore the non-optimal moves. For example, suppose there are two left options H and K such that H ≤ K. If Left wants to play the move H, then Left can play the move K instead. The result will be equivalent or better than if Left had played H. We say that the left option 

H is dominated , and we define this formally as follows: 

Definition 8.3 (Dominated options) . Let G be a game of the form 

G ={︁ H, G L | GR}︁ . Then we say that the left option H is dominated if 

H ≤ GL for some GL̸ = H of G. We say G′ is G with the left option H

removed if G′ ={︁ GL | GR}︁ . Domination for right options is defined dually. In order to make the proof that dominated options can be removed while preserving premotivity, parity, and ∗-antimonotonicity (Theorem 8.5) easier, in the following lemma we assume H ≤c GL instead of assuming H ≤ GL.We are able to do this because, when G is premotive and has parity, H ≤ GL

implies H ≤c GL by Theorem 7.2. 

Lemma 8.4. Let G be a game of the form G ={︁ H, G L | GR}︁ such that H

is dominated, and let G′ ={︁ GL | GR}︁ . Then G ≃c G′.Proof. Let G and G′ be defined as above, and let X be a game over the poset 

A⋆. By Theorem 8.2 we have that G′ ≤c G, so we only need to prove G ≤c G′.We will prove the following claims using induction on X:55 (A) If Left has a second player winning strategy in the game G + X, then Left has a second player winning strategy in the game G′ + X.(B) If Left has a first player winning strategy in the game G + X, then Left has a first player winning strategy in the game G′ + X.First we will prove claim (A). Assume Left has a second player winning strategy in the game G + X. We want to show that Left has a second player winning strategy in the game G′ +X. Every right option of G′ is a right option of G, so those are matched. For all XR of X, Left has a first player winning strategy in the game G + XR. This implies Left has a first player winning strategy in the game G′ + XR by part (B) of the induction hypothesis. Then Left has a first player winning strategy in all the right options of ( G′ + X), so Left must have a second player winning strategy in G′ + X.Now we will prove claim (B). Assume Left has a first player winning strat-egy in G + X. We want to prove that Left has a first player winning strategy in G′ + X. The left options of G + X can be split into three forms: G + XL for some XL of X, GL + X for some GL̸ = H of G, or H + X. If Left has a second player winning strategy in G + XL for some XL of X, then by part (A) of the induction hypothesis we have that Left has a second player winning strategy in G′ + XL, which implies Left has a first player winning strategy in G′ + X.Now, assume Left has a second player winning strategy in GL + X for some 

GL̸ = H of G. Because GL is also a left option of G′, Left has a first player winning strategy in G′ + X. Finally, assume Left has a second player winning strategy in H + X. By assumption, there exists a left option GL of G such that H ≤c GL. Then Left has a second player winning strategy in GL + X

for the GL described above. Then Left has a first player winning strategy in 

G′ + X.

Theorem 8.5 (Removing dominated options) . Let G ={︁ H, G L | GR}︁ be a premotive game with parity such that H is dominated. Let G′ ={︁ GL | GR}︁ .Then G′ is premotive and has parity, and G ≃ G′. Moreover, if G is ∗-antimonotone then G′ is ∗-antimonotone. 56 

Proof. Let G and G′ be defined as above. Because G is premotive and has parity, H ≤ GL implies that H ≤c GL by Theorem 7.2. Then by Theorem 8.4 we have that G ≃c G′.By Theorem 6.14, G ≃c G′ implies that G′ is locally premotive. Because 

G is premotive and every follower of G′ is a follower of G, we have that every follower of G′ is premotive. Then G′ is premotive. Because G and G′ both have parity and are premotive, we have G ≃ G′ by Theorem 7.3. Suppose G is ∗-antimonotone. All of the options of G′ are ∗-antimonotone, so by Theorem 8.1 we have that G′ is ∗-antimonotone. 

8.2 Reversibility 

Another method for simplifying games that is commonly used in combinatorial game theory is bypassing reversible options. Reversible options are defined as follows: 

Definition 8.6 (Reversible options) . Let G ={︁ H, G L | GR}︁ be a game such that K ≤ G for some right option K of H. Then we say that H is a reversible left option of G, and we say that H is reversible through K. We define a 

reversible right option of a game G dually. 

Definition 8.7 (Bypassing a reversible option) . Let G be a game with a left option H that is reversible through a right option K. When we bypass the reversible option from the game G it becomes the game G′ ={︁ KL, G L | GR}︁ .Here, KL denotes all left options of K when K is composite, and when k is atomic KL = { ⊥ | k }.Bypassing a reversible right option is defined dually. Note that, when bypassing a reversible right option, KR = { k | ⊤ } when k is atomic. Note: When k is atomic, then k is contextually equivalent to the composite game { { ⊥ | k } | { k | ⊤ } } . This is why in Definition 8.7 we use { ⊥ | k }

as a stand in for a left option of k when k is atomic. 57 

Remark 8.8. If G has a reversible option and parity then G′, the game G

with the reversible option bypassed, also has parity. In order to make the proof that reversible options can be bypassed while preserving premotivity, parity, and ∗-antimonotonicity (Theorem 8.10) easier, in the following lemma we assume K ≤c G instead of assuming K ≤ G. We are able to do this because, when G and K are premotive and have parity, 

K ≤ G implies K ≤c G.

Lemma 8.9. Let G be a game with a left option H, and a right option K of 

H such that K ≤c G. Then G ≃c G′, where G′ ={︁ KL, G L | GR}︁ .Proof. Let X be a game over the poset A⋆, let G be a game of the form {︁ 

H, G L | GR}︁ , where K is a right option of H such that K ≤c G, and let G′ ={︁ KL, G L | GR}︁ . We will prove the following three claims using induction on the depth of game X:(A) Left has a second player winning strategy in the game G + X if and only if Left has a second player winning strategy in the game G′ + X.(B) Left has a first player winning strategy in the game G + X if and only if Left has a first player winning strategy in the game G′ + X.First we will prove claim (A). We will only prove the left-to-right implica-tion, as the proof of the right-to-left implication is nearly identical. Assume that Left has a second player winning strategy in the game G + X.We want to show that Left has a second player winning strategy in the game 

G′ + X. Because Left has a second player winning strategy in the game G + X,Left must have a first player winning strategy in all right options of the game. We know that Left has a first player winning strategy in the game GR + X -where GR is a right option of G′ - because the every right option of G′ is also a right option of G. Now let G′ + XR be some right option of the game G′ + X.Because Left must have a first player winning strategy in the game G + XR,Left must also have a first player winning strategy in the game G′ + XR by 58 part (C) of the induction hypothesis. This means that Left has a first player winning strategy in every right option of the game G′ + X, which implies that Left has a second player winning strategy in the game G′ + X as desired. Next we will prove claim (B). The proof of the left-to-right implication is as follows: Assume that Left has a first player winning strategy in the game G′ + X.We want to show that Left has a first player winning strategy in the game 

G + X. By assumption, Left must have a second player winning strategy in some left option of G′ + X. This left option could come in one of three forms: the form G + XL for some XL of X, the form GL + X for some GL of G other than H, or the form KL + X for some KL of K, where K is specified above. If Left has a second player winning strategy in a game of the first form, 

G + XL, then Left must have a second player winning strategy in the game 

G′ + XL by part (A) of the induction hypothesis, which means that Left has a first player winning strategy in the game G + X. If Left has a second player winning strategy in a game of the second form, GL + X, then Left must have a first player winning strategy in the game G + X. Now assume that Left has a second player winning strategy in a game of the third form, KL + X.This means that Left has a first player winning strategy in the game K + X.Because K ≤c G, Left must then have a first player winning strategy in the game G + X. Then Left having a first player winning strategy in G′ + X

implies the existence of a first player winning strategy for Left in G + X.Finally, we will prove the right-to-left implication. Assume that Left has a first player winning strategy in the game G + X. We want to show that Left has a first player winning strategy in the game G′ + X. By assumption Left must have a second player winning strategy in some left option of G + X. If the left option in question is of the form G + XL or GL + X (for GL̸ = H), then the same reasoning used in the ( ⇐) part of (B) applies. Assume that Left has a second player winning strategy in the game H + X. Then Left has a first player winning strategy in the game K + X.Because K ≤c G, if there exists some XL such that Left has a second player 59 winning strategy in K + XL, then Left must have a second player winning strategy in G + XL, and so we repeat the argument for the case above. Then suppose there is some KL of K such that Left has a second player winning strategy in KL + X. Because KL is a left option of G′, Left has a first player winning strategy in the game G′ + X.

Theorem 8.10. Let G be a premotive game with parity, and suppose G has a left option H that is reversible through K ≤ G, and let G′ be the game G

with its reversible option bypassed. Then G′ is premotive and has parity and 

G ≃ G′. Moreover, if G is ∗-antimonotone then G′ is as well. Proof. Assume G and G′ are as above. Because G and K are both premotive and have parity, we have K ≤c G by Theorem 7.2. By Theorem 8.9, we know 

G ≃c G′. By Theorem 6.14 we have that G′ is also premotive. The left option 

H of G has the same parity as each KL, so the game G′ has parity as well. Both G and G′ are premotive and have parity and G ≃c G′, which implies 

G ≃ G′ by Theorem 7.3. Now, suppose that G is ∗-antimonotone. Every option of G′ is a fol-lower of G, so all of the options of G′ are ∗-antimonotone. Therefore G′ is 

∗-antimonotone by Theorem 8.1. 

Remark 8.11 (A note on { { ⊥ | k } | { k | ⊤ } } ). Both the left and right options of the game { { ⊥ | k } | { k | ⊤ } } are reversible through the atom k.When we try to bypass these reversible options, however, we end up returning to { { ⊥ | k } | { k | ⊤ } } . This becomes a problem when we are trying to bypass all the reversible options of a game. We generalize this issue in the following definition: 

Definition 8.12. Let G be a game over some poset A with a reversible left option H. We say H is a simple reversible left option if H = { ⊥ | k } for some k ∈ A. Simple reversible right options are defined dually. Next are two lemmas relating to these simple reversible options that we will use in the following section. 60 

Lemma 8.13. Let x and G be games over the poset A such that x is atomic and G is composite. If G is odd and Left has a second player winning strategy in xop +λ G, then { ⊥ | x } ≤ G.Proof. We will prove this claim via induction on the game G. Let G and x

be games as described above, and assume Left has a second player winning strategy in the game xop +λ G. We want to show that { ⊥ | x } ≤ G. First, we know that ⊥ ◁ G by Theorem 6.6. Next we must show that { ⊥ | x } ◁ GR for all right options GR of G. Let GR be a right option of G. By assumption, Left must has a first player winning strategy in the game xop +λ GR. If GR = a is atomic, then our strategy tells us that x ≤ a. Assume GR is composite. Then let GRL be a left option of GR such that Left has a second player winning strategy in the game xop +λ GRL . Then, by the induction hypothesis, we have 

{ ⊥ | x } ≤ GRL . So { ⊥ | x } ◁ GR for all right options GR of G, which implies { ⊥ | x } ≤ G, as desired. 

Corollary 8.14. Let x and G be premotive games over some poset A such that x is atomic and G is composite and has parity. If x ≤ G, then there is a left option GL of G such that { ⊥ | x } ≤ GL.Proof. Let x and G be games as described above, and assume x ≤ G. By Theorem 5.4 we know Left has a second player winning strategy in the game 

xop +λ G. By Theorem 6.13 we know Left has a first player winning strategy in the game xop +λ G. Then, because G is composite, there must exist some GL of 

G such that Left has a second player winning strategy in the game xop +λ GL.Because G is even, the game GL is odd. Then by the previous lemma we have that { ⊥ | x } ≤ GL.

8.3 Canonical Forms 

When studying normal play games, we find the canonical form of a game G by removing all of its dominated options, bypassing all of its reversible options, and recursively repeating this process with the left and right options of G. We 61 would like to do something similar in Rex, but we run into problems when bypassing reversible options. If G is a game with a simple reversible option, and G′ is G with that reversible option bypassed, then by Theorem 8.11 we have that G′ is identical to G. This means that there are games in which it is impossible to bypass all of its reversible options: for example, take the game 

G = { { ⊥ | a } , { ⊥ | b } | { a, b | ⊤ } } .

We have that G is ∗-antimonotone, premotive, and has parity, and we also have that a ≤ G and b ≤ G. Then both of the left options of G are simple reversible options. In order to treat this problem, we may attempt to say a game G is in canonical form if none of its options are dominated, all of its reversible options are simple, and the left and right options of G are in canonical form. This definition of canonical form escapes the looping problem and finds the smallest game equivalent to G, with the exception of { { ⊥ | x } | { x | ⊤ } } , which cannot be further reduced even though it is equivalent to x. Because of this, in the case where G is equivalent to an atom, the process described above may not result in the atomic game expected. As the next proposition shows, this is the only exception. 

Proposition 8.15. Let G be a composite premotive game with parity over some poset A whose options are not dominated and whose reversible options are simple. If G ≃ x for some x in A, then G = { { ⊥ | x } | { x | ⊤ } } .Proof. Let G be a composite game as described above, and assume G ≃ x for some x in A. We want to show that G is identical to { { ⊥ | x } | { x | ⊤ } } .Consider any GL of G. From G ≤ x, we have GL ◁ x. This implies that there is some GLR such that GLR ≤ x. Because x ≃ G, we have that GL is a reversible left option. By assumption GL is simple, i.e., GL = { ⊥ | y } for some y ∈ A, and we have that y = GLR ≤ x. Every left option of G is of the form { ⊥ | y } with y ≤ x. Also, because x ≤ G, there must exist some 

GL′ such that { ⊥ | x } ≤ GL′ by Theorem 8.14. The game GL′ dominates every left option of G. We assumed that G had no dominated options, so 62 

GL′ must be the only left option. We know GL′ = { ⊥ | y } and we know 

{ ⊥ | x } ≃ GL′. Therefore, the only left option of G is GL′ = { ⊥ | x }.Dually, the only right option of G is { x | ⊤ } , proving the claim. Because of Theorem 8.15, we define a canonical game to exclude the case where G = { { ⊥ | k } | { k | ⊤ } } .

Definition 8.16. A game G over the poset A is canonical if all of the following hold: 

• None of the options of G are dominated, 

• the only reversible options of G are simple, 

• G is not of the form { { ⊥ | x } | { x | ⊤ } } for some atom x in A, and 

• all left/right options of G are canonical. 

Theorem 8.17 (Uniqueness of canonical forms) . Let G and H be premotive games with parity over the poset A which are canonical. If G ≃ H, then 

G = H.Proof. Let G and H be as above. We want to show that G = H. If g and h

are atomic, then because g ≃ h we know that g = h by definition. Assume that G or H is composite. By Theorem 8.15 and the definition of a canonical game, we have that both G and H must be composite. First we will prove the following four claims: (A) For every GL of G, there exists some HL of H such that GL ≤ HL.(B) For every HL of H, there exists some GL of G such that HL ≤ GL.(C) For every GR of G, there exists some HR of H such that GR ≤ HR.(D) For every HR of H, there exists some GR of G such that HR ≤ GR.We will prove claim (A). Let GL be a left option of G. Because G ≤ H, we know that GL ◁ H. From this, we know that either there exists some HL of H63 such that GL ≤ HL or there exists some GLR of GL such that GLR ≤ H. If we have HL such that GL ≤ HL, then we are done. Assume we have a GLR ≤ H

for some GLR of GL. Because H ≤ G and H is premotive, by transitivity we have that GLR ≤ G, so GL is a reversible left option of G. Since G is canonical, 

GL is simple, i.e., GL = { ⊥ | a } where a is an atomic game. Then because 

a ≤ H, by Theorem 8.14 we know there exists a left option HL of H such that 

{ ⊥ | a } ≤ HL, so GL ≤ HL as desired. The proof of (B), (C), and (D) are similar. Let GL be the set of left options of G, and similarly for GR, HL, and HR.We will now prove that GL = HL. Let GL be some left option of G. Then by (A) there exists some HL of H such that GL ≤ HL. By (B) there exists some 

GL′ of G such that HL ≤ GL′. Because HL is premotive, by transitivity we have that GL ≤ GL′. Because G has no dominated options, it must be that 

GL = GL′. Then GL ≤ HL ≤ GL, which implies GL ≃ HL. The games GL

and HL are canonical, so by the induction hypothesis GL = HL. Then GL

is a subset of HL. By similar reasoning we have that HL is a subset of GL.Thus, we have that GL = HL. The proof that GR = HR is dual. Therefore, the game G is identical to the game H, as desired. We say that a game is finite if it has finitely many followers. If G is a finite game, then we can repeatedly remove all of its dominated options, bypass all of its non-simple reversible options, and replace 

{ { ⊥ | x } | { x | ⊤ } } by x. At the end of this process we will have a canon-ical form. Therefore we have the following: 

Corollary 8.18 (Existence of canonical forms) . Every finite game has a unique canonical form. Chapter 9 Conclusion 

9.1 Analysis of large games of Rex 

Now that we have a method for finding the unique canonical form of a game, we can use this power to more easily analyze large games of Rex. We will now demonstrate how this may be done by determining the outcome class of the game from Chapter 2. Here is the original position: And here is our suggested way of splitting the board: 1 2

G1

2 4

a b

c

3

G2

45

G3

First we will analyze G1. We can view this as a two-terminal position, with 1 and 2 being the north and south terminals, respectively. Then the outcome poset is B. For ease of addition, however, we will refer to the atoms by which terminals are connected: One can show that the canonical form of 

G1 is { (1 , 2) | ⊤ } .The game G3 is also a position with two terminals, labeled 4 and 5 . 64 65 Black has a second player winning strategy in G3 and the game is even, so its canonical form is ⊤.As shown in Figure 4.7, the game G2 is a 3-terminal position. The canonical form of G2 is quite large, so it is helpful to break it into subpositions. If Left were to play in the cell a , one can show that the resulting game would have the following canonical form: 

Ca = { { (2 , 3, 4) | (2 , 3) } , { (2 , 3, 4) | (2 , 4) } | { (2 , 3) | ⊤ } , { (2 , 4) | ⊤ } } .

Similarly, if Left were to play in the cell b or c :

Cb = { { (2 , 3, 4) | (2 , 4) } , { (2 , 3, 4) | (3 , 4) } | { (2 , 4) | ⊤ } , { (3 , 4) | ⊤ } } .Cc = { { (2 , 3, 4) | (2 , 3) } , { (2 , 3, 4) | (3 , 4) } | { (2 , 3) | ⊤ } , { (3 , 4) | ⊤ } } .

It turns out that the canonical form of G2 is { Ca, C b, C c | ⊤ } .Now that we have found the canonical form for each region, all we need is a map f : B × P3 × B → B such that f (a, b, c ) = ⊥ if and only if the northern terminal of the larger board is connected to the southern terminal, i.e., when 1 or 4 is connected to 3 or 5 . The canonical form of f (G1 + G2 + G3) is ⊤, meaning that o(G) = L. You may be wondering why the canonical form of G2 is so much larger than that of G1, G3, and f (G1, G 2, G 3). As it turns out, there are only 6 games over B

up to equivalence that are both premotive and ∗-antimonotone. Of course, we must have ⊤ and ⊥, along with X = { ⊥ | ⊤ } . The other 3 games are ⊤ + ∗,

⊥ + ∗, and X + ∗. This means that there are only 6 possible options for the canonical form of a game over B, all of which are rather small. 

9.2 Future work 

Realizability of games as positions in Rex: While we can always turn a Rex position into a game form, not every game form can be realized as a Rex position. For example, if a game form is not ∗-antimonotone and/or premotive then it cannot be realized as a position in Rex. Some research has been done 66 into what positions are Hex realizable, and one could use the work in this thesis to explore similar ideas for Rex. 

PSPACE completeness of Rex: Many combinatorial games have been shown to be PSPACE complete. In fact, some antimonotone set coloring games have been shown to be PSPACE complete [4]. We would like to use our method of determining canonical forms to develop gadgets, which we will use to deter-mine if Rex is PSPACE complete or not. Bibliography 

[1] Elwyn R. Berlekamp, John H. Conway, and Richard K. Guy. Winning Ways for Your Mathematical Plays. Vol. 2 . Academic Press, Inc., 1982. [2] Charles L. Bouton. Nim, a game with a complete mathematical theory. 

Ann. of Math. (2) , 3(1-4):35–39, 1901/02. [3] J. H. Conway. On Numbers and Games . A K Peters, Ltd., Natick, MA, second edition, 2001. [4] Valentin Gledel and Nacim Oijid. Avoidance games are PSPACE-complete. In 40th International Symposium on Theoretical Aspects of Computer Sci-ence , volume 254 of LIPIcs. Leibniz Int. Proc. Inform. Schloss Dagstuhl. Leibniz-Zent. Inform., Wadern, 2023. [5] Urban Larsson, Richard J. Nowakowski, and Carlos P. Santos. Absolute combinatorial game theory. In Games of No Chance 6 , volume 71 of Math. Sci. Res. Inst. Publ. , pages 99–134. Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge, 2025. [6] Dierk Schleicher and Michael Stoll. An introduction to Conway’s games and numbers. Mosc. Math. J. , 6(2):359–388, 407, 2006. [7] Peter Selinger. On the combinatorial value of Hex positions. Integers ,22:G3, 2022. 65 pages. 67