Title: Positional Properties in Temporal Logic

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.25628v1

Published Time: Wed, 29 Apr 2026 01:00:14 GMT

Number of Pages: 36

Markdown Content:
# Positional Properties in Temporal Logic 

# Jessica Newman #

University of Southampton, UK 

# Benjamin Plummer #

University of Southampton, UK 

Abstract 

We study positional properties in the context of game-based reactive synthesis. Our motivation stems from having a usable specification logic, for which tractable synthesis is guaranteed. We demonstrate that every ω-regular positional property (with respect to state- or edge-labelled game graphs), is expressible in linear-time temporal logic. Additionally, we provide some necessary and sufficient conditions for when an ω-regular property is positional, and identify well-behaved subclasses of ω-regular positional properties. Using varieties of languages, we prove that no class of ω-regular positional properties can simultaneously contain a prefix-independent property and be closed under Boolean operations. We conclude by discussing the implications on alternating-time temporal logic, where we isolate a few different fragments with tractable model checking, and compare the associated expressivity of such fragments. 

2012 ACM Subject Classification Theory of computation → Modal and temporal logics; Theory of computation → Automata over infinite objects; Theory of computation → Algebraic language theory 

Keywords and phrases Positionality, Temporal Logic, ATL, Games on graphs 

Digital Object Identifier 10.4230/LIPIcs.CVIT.2016.23 

Acknowledgements We thank Corina Cîrstea and Enrico Marchioni for their valuable feedback. 

# 1 Introduction 

Infinite duration, two-player graph games provide a fundamental model of the interaction between a system and its environment . The problem of reactive synthesis (generating a system controller which implements a specification) can be phrased as computing a winning strategy on such a game. This technique quickly becomes intractable, and is highly sensitive to the (logical) formalism chosen to express the desired property of the system. Even when using the property-specification logic linear-time temporal logic ( LTL ) [ 42 ], which has powerful automata-theoretic tools, the synthesis problem is famously 2EXPTIME-complete [ 9]. This provides a major obstacle to applying synthesis in practical applications. The difficulty of synthesis is inextricably linked to the vast number of possible strategies: on any non-trivial game graph (even with a single player), there are an infinite number of possible strategies, due to the fact that strategies can use an arbitrary amount of memory. If one could impose a maximum bound on the amount of memory that a strategy can use, we could reduce the space of strategies to be finite (at least for games with a finite state space). This, in turn, reduces LTL synthesis to LTL model checking - which is PSPACE-complete [46 ] - by guessing a strategy which uses memory less than the bound, and then performing model checking on each induced transition system. Notice that this discussion also carries over to model checking of the alternating-time temporal logic ATL ∗ [ 2] interpreted over game structures, whereby combining the classical labelling algorithm (see [ 1]) with LTL model checking the path formula (which performs LTL synthesis in the manner just described) enables us to also reduce ATL * model checking to LTL model checking. However, in both cases ( LTL synthesis and ATL * model checking) this approach is doomed to fail, as the  

> ©Jessica Newman and Benjamin Plummer; licensed under Creative Commons License CC-BY 4.0 42nd Conference on Very Important Topics (CVIT 2016). Editors: John Q. Open and Joan R. Access; Article No. 23; pp. 23:1–23:36 Leibniz International Proceedings in Informatics
> Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, Dagstuhl Publishing, Germany
> arXiv:2604.25628v1 [cs.LO] 28 Apr 2026

23:2 Positional Properties in Temporal Logic 

amount of memory that winning strategies may require is unbounded. In this work, we investigate to what extent we can syntactically restrict the collection of 

LTL formulas (or, more generally, the path formula in ATL *), to obtain a class of properties whose winning strategies’ memory can be bounded by zero - i.e. properties where positional 

strategies suffice. LTL is recognised as having a good balance between expressiveness and 

usability , and our key result (Theorem 25) is a positive one: every ω-regular positional property is expressible in LTL . As we shall see, which properties are positional is sensitive to the kind of games which we are doing synthesis over, specifically to whether labels (sometimes called colours) appear on the edges or on the states . Our result is with respect to the larger class of positional properties: those which are positional over state-labelled games. These are a natural class of properties in ATL ∗, because atomic propositions are assigned to states. Recently, (edge-labelled) positional ω-regular objectives have received a full character-isation in [ 18 ], providing different classes of automata which recognise them. One key observation in loc. cit. is that a positional language L always has a totally ordered set of residuals (recall that, for some finite word u, the residual is the set containing all suffixes v

such that uv is in L). This requirement lends itself to an automata-theoretic perspective, as every language admits a canonical automaton whose states consist of the residuals of the language, so characterisations can be based on this automaton. However, the requirement of totally ordered residuals can instead be presented as a purely syntactic closure condition on the language 1. The authors of [ 18 ] note that a language-theoretic characterisation, us-ing conditions of this form, is left open. We complement their results by providing such a language-theoretic characterisation of positional ω-regular languages over edge-labelled arenas in terms of additional closure conditions on the language (Corollary 10). This comes with two main benefits: firstly, these conditions can be phrased algebraically, enabling the use of tools from algebraic language theory (we pursue this in Section 5). Secondly, they naturally extend to the setting of state-labelled positionality (Theorem 23), which is less clear in the automata-theoretic case. We further investigate this in Proposition 24, finding that a property is positional over state-labelled arenas when it can be played optimally with memory of the previous label in edge-labelled arenas .In the latter half of the paper, we apply this characterisation to various problems. Firstly, we use this to obtain a precise characterisation of positional ω-regular prefix-independent 

languages (Proposition 13). We then investigate whether we can isolate a language variety (of infinite words) consisting entirely of positional properties. This would give us a good candidate for a specification language to express positional properties (as language varieties are closed under Boolean operations). Unfortunately, we present a negative result in Corollary 28, that: 

any (non-trivial) variety of languages consisting only of positional properties does not contain any prefix-independent properties . This immediately rules out the existence of formalisms that both support combining positional properties via logical connectives and include basic positional prefix-independent properties such as Büchi objectives. Our final endeavour is to present several possible restrictions of the path formula in ATL *, which ensure they can only express positional properties. We discuss the associated model checking problems, and give a fine-grained analysis of their expressiveness, comparing them to the logics EATL and EATL + [23]. 

Related Work. Determining which objectives in infinite games are positional has been well-studied, with a prominent example being that parity objectives are bipositional [ 24 ]. It                

> 1if a word uv ∈Land a word xy ∈L, then either xv ∈Lor uy ∈L.

J. Newman and B. Plummer 23:3 

was later clarified that parity objectives are precisely the bipositional Muller objectives [ 49 ]and the bipositional prefix-independent objectives [ 20 ]. A full characterisation of bipositional objectives (for finite games) was provided in [ 26 ]. The class of prefix-independent positional objectives was further studied in [ 29 ] and later in [ 7 ], with several sufficient conditions found. However, a full characterisation of prefix-independent positional objectives remains open. Further classes where positionality has been characterised include languages recognised by deterministic Büchi automata [ 11 ], safety games [ 19 ], and the Borel class Σ02 [38 ]. A general characterisation of positionality in terms of universal graphs was given in [37]. Some sufficient conditions for positional ω-regular objectives were given in [ 30 ], and a more general characterisation of memory requirements in [ 12 ]. Further results on memory requirements for different objectives can be found in [ 47 ]. As mentioned above, some full characterisations of positional ω-regular languages have been presented in [18]. The positionality of model checking has been previously noted for fragments of temporal logic such as ATL [ 14 ], and there has been some analysis on restricting certain variants of 

ATL ∗ to positional strategies [ 45 , 15 ]. It has also been found that all formulae in ATL +, a fragment with non-positional path formulae, can be expressed in ATL [ 27 ]. In a similar spirit, some fragments of Strategy Logic have been identified in which the strategies required are less complex than the full Strategy Logic [36, 25]. In a similar spirit to the motivation of our work on temporal logic, GR(1) synthesis [ 10 ]syntactically restricts LTL specifications to obtain a polynomial-time synthesis algorithm (we comment on the relationship between our approaches in Remark 33). 

Contributions & Organisation. We start, in Section 2, by fixing definitions and notation, and recalling basic facts we use about: two-player games, positional properties, language theory, and temporal logic. In Section 3, we investigate edge-labelled positional properties, we discuss: expressing positional properties in LTL (Section 3.1); a language-theoretic characterisation of ω-regular positionality (Section 3.2); and how this characterisation simplifies in the case of prefix-independent ω-regular languages (Section 3.3). Section 4 then relates our findings to state-labelled positionality: we give a language-theoretic characterisation for this more general class of properties (Section 4.1), and show how our expressibility result transfers to the state-labelled setting (Section 4.2). In Section 5 we prove our no-go theorem stating that no ∞-variety can exist which consists of positional properties and contains a prefix-independent property. In Section 6, we describe how one can perform efficient model checking for positional fragments of ATL ∗, and propose two such fragments. Finally, Section 6.1 gives various inexpressibility results, establishing a hierarchy including several variants of ATL .We now outline our contributions, we: Prove that all ω-regular languages which are positional over edge-labelled, and state-labelled, games are expressible in LTL (Theorems 5 and 25). Obtain a language-theoretic characterisation for when an ω-regular language is positional over edge-labelled, and state-labelled, games (Corollary 10 and Theorem 23). Furthermore, we show this can be simplified when the language is prefix-independent (Proposition 13). Provide a polynomial-time decision procedure to decide whether a Wilke algebra recognises a positional language (Corollary 11). Give a concrete description of a large class of positional prefix-independent languages (Proposition 16). Show that there is no language variety consisting entirely of positional languages which contains a prefix-independent language (Corollary 28). 

C V I T 2 0 1 6 23:4 Positional Properties in Temporal Logic 

Establish that the ATL ∗ model checking problem (which can state LTL synthesis) for pos-itional fragments is in PSPACE, and for bipositional fragments is in Σp 

> 2

(Proposition 30). Present several positional fragments of ATL * and establish an expressivity hierarchy among them, and other variants of ATL (Theorem 35). Proofs have been omitted due to space limitations, full proofs can be found in Section A. 

# 2 Preliminaries 

Words. Fix an alphabet Σ. We use Σ∗, Σ+, Σω , and Σ∞ to denote the set finite words, finite non-empty words, infinite words, and possibly infinite words (i.e. Σ∞ := Σ ω ∪ Σ∗), respectively. Note we can take a relation as the alphabet, and then words will be sequences of pairs in the relation. We write w[i..j ] for sub-word of w from index i to index j inclusive, for any word w ∈ Σ∞ which has length greater than or equal to i and j. We write w[i] := w[i, i ].

Arenas. Two-player games are played on arenas : tuples (V1, V 2, δ ) where V1 and V2 are finite sets of states controlled by Player 1 and Player 2 respectively, and δ ⊆ V × V is a total relation, where we write V for the disjoint union of V1 and V2. Given an edge e ∈ δ

where e = ( v, v ′), we define src (e) := v and tgt (e) := v′. Our arenas will implicitly come equipped with a labelling , where labels comes from a set Σ. These come in two forms: edge-labelled and state-labelled . A state-labelled arena comes equipped with a function π : V → Σ,assigning labels to states. An edge-labelled arena replaces the above δ with a total relation 

δ ⊆ V × (Σ × V ), associating each edge with a label, note there can now be multiple edges between states (but with different labels). Given an element e ∈ δ such that e = ( v, c, v ′), we define src (e) := v, tgt (e) := v′ and col (e) := c. When drawing diagrams of arenas, we will sometimes draw an edge x → y labelled with a word a0 . . . a n ∈ Σ+, when it determines a unique sequence of transitions x a0

−→ · · · an

−−→ y in the arena. 

Games & Strategies. Given a (labelled) arena (V1, V 2, δ ), a strategy is a function σ :

V ∪ δ+ → δ such that src (σ(v)) = v and σ(v) ∈ δ for all v ∈ V , and src (σ(we )) = tgt (e)

and σ(we ) ∈ δ for all w ∈ δ∗ and e ∈ δ. A strategy selects for each state an edge which is accessible from that state, and for each nonempty sequence of edges an edge which is accessible from the target state of the final edge in that sequence. We define a positional strategy as a function σ : V → δ, such that src (σ(v)) = v and σ(v) ∈ δ for all v ∈ V .Note that our definitions of strategy are a little nonstandard, as they pick moves at states controlled by both players. The players are differentiated in the following definition of play .

> ς[0] =

{         

> σ1(q)if q∈V1
> σ2(q)if q∈V2
> ς[i+ 1] =

{        

> σ1(ς[0 , i ]) if tgt (ς[i]) ∈V1
> σ2(ς[0 , i ]) if tgt (ς[i]) ∈V2

Given an arena (V1, V 2, δ ),an initial state q ∈ V , and two strategies σ1, σ 2, a play 

ς ∈ δω is defined inductively on the right. The definition is analagous for positional strategies, but we only require the previous state tgt (ς[i]) rather than the play so far. Every play ς

generates an associated trace λ ∈ Σω . For state-labelled arenas, we can set λ[i] = π(src (ς[i])) .For edge-labelled arenas, we can set λ[i] = col (ς[i]) ). We will denote the play generated by strategies σ1, σ 2 as play (σ1, σ 2, q ) and the trace as trace (σ1, σ 2, q ). Given a labelled arena, a strategy σ, and an initial state q, we define the Player 1 outcome of σ as the set 

out 1(σ, q ) := {trace (σ, σ ′, q ) | σ′ is a strategy }. The Player 2 outcome of σ out 2(σ, q ) can be defined analogously (this time the first component in trace will be quantified over). A property is a subset of traces L ⊆ Σω . We can assign a property as the winning condition ,or objective , of a game played over an arena. Given an arena with winning condition L and J. Newman and B. Plummer 23:5 

initial state q, we say Player 1 is (positionally) winning iff there is a (positional) strategy 

σ1 such that out 1(σ1, q ) ⊆ L. Player 2 is (positionally) winning iff they have a (positional) strategy σ2 such that out 2(σ2, q ) ⊆ Σω \ L. It is well known that ω-regular languages are 

determined winning conditions [13]: Player 1 is winning iff Player 2 is not winning. 

Positionality. A property L is state-labelled (edge-labelled) positional , whenever Player 1 is winning in some state-labelled (edge-labelled) arena with objective L at state q, they are positionally winning from q also. A property L is state-labelled (edge-labelled) bipositional if both L and Σω \ L are state-labelled (edge-labelled) positional. We can restrict the notions of positionality to arenas where all states are controlled by Player 1 (where V2 = ∅). The resulting notions are 1P edge-labelled positional and 1P state-labelled positional properties. Finally, we define uniform 1P state-labelled (edge-labelled) positional properties to be properties L

where: given a strategy σ on a 1P state-labelled (edge-labelled) arena and a subset Q ⊆ V

where Player 1 is winning using σ from every state in Q, then there also exists a positional strategy σ′ such that Player 1 is winning from every state in Q using σ′.

ω-regular languages. ω-regular languages can be equivalently defined, inter alia, as the languages recognised by finite ω-semigroups and finite Büchi automata [ 17 ], expressible in the monadic second-order logic S1S [ 44 ], and given by ω-regular expressions [ 35 ]. They include languages expressible in LTL [48 ]. Winning a game with an ω-regular objective requires only a finite-memory strategy [ 13 ]. Two ω-regular languages are equivalent exactly when they have the same set of ultimately periodic words, i.e. words of the form uv ω for 

u, v ∈ Σ∗ [ 16 ]. Given a language L ⊆ Σω and word u ∈ Σ∗, we can obtain the residual 

RL(u) = {v ∈ Σω | uv ∈ L}. For ω-regular languages, the set R(L) = {RL(u) | u ∈ Σ∗}

of residuals is finite [ 33 ]. We say a language L has totally ordered residuals when R(L) is totally ordered by inclusion. A language L is prefix-independent when for any word in the language, we can add or remove any finite prefix and remain in the language, i.e. for all 

x ∈ Σω , for any u ∈ Σ∗, x ∈ L iff ux ∈ L.

Algebraic Language Theory. We recall standard notions from algebraic language theory (full details can be found in e.g. [ 39 ]). An ω-semigroup is a pair S = ( S+, S ω ) of a semigroup S+

and a set Sω , equipped with a mixed product S+ × Sω → Sω and infinite product π : Sω 

> +

→ Sω .We say S recognises a language L ⊆ Σ∞ if there is a homomorphism φ : Σ ∞ → S from the free ω-semigroup Σ∞ = (Σ ∗, Σω ) to S such that for some F ⊆ S+ ∪ Sω , φ−1(F ) = L. Finite 

ω-semigroups recognise exactly the ( ω-)regular languages, and admit finite presentations as 

Wilke algebras , in which the infinite product is determined by a map (−)ω : S+ → Sω .A variety of ω-semigroups is a class of ω-semigroups closed under subsemigroups, quotients, and finite products. An ∞-variety of languages is a class of recognisable languages closed under Boolean operations, residuals, and preimages of morphisms between free ω-semigroups. Varieties of ω-semigroups are in bijective correspondence with ∞-varieties of languages [ 40 ]. 

Linear-time Temporal Logic. LTL is a property-specification logic, used to specify subsets of infinite words. We define the syntax of LTL over our set of labels Σ, by taking the smallest collection of formulas such that each a ∈ Σ is a formula, and ¬φ, φ ∨ ψ, Xφ , and φU ψ are all formulas when φ and ψ are formulas. The semantics of LTL are subsets of infinite words 

Σω , defined in the standard way. A key fact we shall use in Section 3, is that LTL (when the semantics is taken over possibly infinite words) expresses exactly the star-free languages [ 22 ]: the smallest class of languages containing ∅ and {a} for each a ∈ Σ, and closed under finite 

C V I T 2 0 1 6 23:6 Positional Properties in Temporal Logic 

union, complementation and concatenation. We shall use ω-star-free to mean the part of the class which consists of languages of infinite words. It can be useful to consider the semantics of LTL over 1P state-labelled arenas, where we take Σ to be 2P rop , the set of subsets of atomic propositions (these are known as serial Kripke frames to modal logicians). Here there are two choices, the existential or universal 

semantics: depending on whether we are looking for a single path through the transition system which generates the formula as a trace, or we demand that every possible trace through the transition system satisfies the formula. 

Alternating-time Temporal Logic. ATL ∗ extends LTL by allowing path formulae , defined in LTL , to be bound to modalities ⟨C⟩ which determine (in the semantics) a set of subsets of traces from a state, according to what the coalition of agents C can force. A formula ⟨C⟩φ,where φ is an LTL formula, will be satisfied at a state x when there exists a subset of traces that C can force from x, such that every trace within satisfies φ. An implicit parameter of this logic is the set of agents Ag .In this paper we often consider fragments of ATL ∗ generated by a fragment of LTL 

which are allowed as the path formulae. To this end, we define the syntax of the logic as parameterised over a subset A of LTL formula which possibly contain free variables. The grammar for ATL + A is separated into state formula ψ and path formula φ. For any 

p ∈ P rop, C ⊆ Ag, α (x1, . . . , x n) ∈ A :

ψ ::= p | ψ ∨ ψ | ¬ ψ | ⟨ C⟩φ φ ::= Xψ | ψU ψ | ψRψ | α[ψ1 . . . ψ n]

The semantics of the logic is taken over concurrent game structures , we refer to [ 21 , Chapter II, 9] for details. When A = ∅ we get plain ATL ; when A to be all LTL formulae possibly with free variables we obtain the full logic ATL ∗; when we take A to contain F G and GF 

(with free variables in the obvious places) we get EATL ; when we take A to contain Boolean combinations of X, U , and R we get ATL +; and when we take A to take Boolean combinations of X, U , R, GF , and F G we get EATL +. When we impose that there is precisely one agent, we get CTL , CTL ∗, ECTL , CTL +, and ECTL +, using the values of A in the previous sentence. In Section 6 we will consider fragments ATL + A where we take A to contain single formula with free variables, we shall abuse notation and omit the set notation and the free variables. We can give a positional semantics for ATL +A by taking the subsets of traces from a state 

x as the subsets which arise from positional strategies for C. Furthermore, we can consider a bipositional semantics , when each trace in each subset (which arises from a positional 

C-strategy) arises from a positional strategy for Ag \ C. It is a well-known fact that the positional semantics of ATL agrees with the regular semantics which use memoryful strategies (in fact, the bipositional semantics of ATL also agrees with the regular semantics). 

# 3 Edge-Labelled Positional Omega-Regular Languages 

We refer to edge-labelled positional properties as positional properties in this section. 

# 3.1 Expressibility in LTL 

We will prove the statement that all ω-regular positional properties are ω-star-free (or equivalently, expressible as LTL formulae). Our approach is to characterise the ω-star-free languages as those which are counter-free and ω-counter-free (we define these notions shortly). The benefit of this, is that being ( ω-)counter-free is a language-theoretic property, which gives J. Newman and B. Plummer 23:7 

us direct methods to show that they follow from a language being positional (in Lemma 3 and Lemma 4). 

▶ Definition 1. A language L ∈ Σω is (CF) counter-free whenever uv nw ∈ L iff uv n+mw ∈ L for all m ∈ N,(ω-CF) ω-counter-free whenever u(vx ny)ω ∈ L iff u(vx n+my)ω ∈ L for all m ∈ N,for some n ∈ N and all u, v, x, y ∈ Σ∗ and w ∈ Σω .

A language being counter-free enforces that it behaves aperiodically on the finite prefixes of infinite words, whereas it being ω-counter-free enforces that it behaves aperiodically on the factors of ultimately periodic words. It is well know that ω-star-free languages are those which can be recognised by finite aperiodic monoids [ 22 , Theorem 1.1], which we can show enforce the same aperiodicity conditions. Note that the only if direction of Proposition 2 relies on the Arnold congruence from [4]. 

▶ Proposition 2. An ω-regular language L ⊆ Σω is ω-star-free iff it is counter-free and 

ω-counter-free. 

Recall that the set of residuals for a language is: totally ordered when the language is positional [ 18 , Lemma 4.1]; and finite when the language is ω-regular. These two properties are enough to show that a language is counter-free. Roughly, if residuals are totally ordered by inclusion, then the residuals of any word uv i form a monotone chain, so membership of a word uv iw in L can change at most once; otherwise two residuals would be incomparable. But a non-counter-free language forces words where this change happens at arbitrarily high 

i, yielding arbitrarily many distinct residuals, contradicting finiteness. 

▶ Lemma 3. If a language L ⊆ Σω has a finite set of residuals R(L) which is totally ordered by inclusion, then it is counter-free. 

We have a similar result for ω-counter-freeness, by first showing that for each word 

u(vw ix), there is a bound on i at which the word no longer changes membership of L, and then showing this bound is uniform using the syntactic congruence from [4]. 

▶ Lemma 4. If a language L ⊆ Σω is ω-regular and positional, then it is ω-counter-free. 

Combining Proposition 2, Lemma 3, and Lemma 4, we obtain: 

▶ Theorem 5. If a language L ⊆ Σω is ω-regular and positional, then it is ω-star-free. 

Since LTL can express all ω-star-free languages (and vice versa), then all positional properties can be expressed in LTL .

# 3.2 Language-Theoretic Characterisation 

In this section we will provide a characterisation for ω-regular properties which are positional over edge-labelled arenas. We shall use that for a game with an ω-regular winning condition, a player has a winning strategy iff they have a winning strategy with memory that can be encoded in finite states [ 13 ]. In a 1P arena, this will generate an ultimately periodic play, i.e. a play of the form pl ω for some p ∈ δ∗, l ∈ δ+. The main idea is to enforce closure conditions on L which guarantee that for any winning ultimately periodic play pl ω , there exists a winning ultimately periodic play p′l′ω where p′l′ contains strictly fewer violations of positionality - choices of different edges from same state - than pl ; this is done with closure conditions that guarantee for any cycle in the play beginning and ending on the same state, 

C V I T 2 0 1 6 23:8 Positional Properties in Temporal Logic 

either we can remove this cycle or take this cycle forever and still have a winning play. Since 

pl is finite, it contains a finite number of violations of positionality, so we end up with an ultimately periodic play in which any given state is always followed by the same edge. From this we can construct a positional strategy which generates the same play. We can find some closure conditions which achieve this and are also necessary for positionality. This method lets us characterise non-uniform 1P positional properties: 

▶ Proposition 6. An ω-regular language L is 1P positional 2 iff for all u, y ∈ Σ∗, v, w, x ∈ Σ+:(1) if uvwx ω ∈ L then either uv ω ∈ L or uwx ω ∈ L

(2) if u(vwy )ω ∈ L then either uvw ω ∈ L or u(vy )ω ∈ L

The closure under union of certain classes of positional language has been a notable question since [ 31 ]. It can be seen that when we take a finite union of such languages, the resulting language will still satisfy the closure conditions (1) and (2). Therefore: 

▶ Proposition 7. ω-regular non-uniform 1P positional languages are closed under finite union. 

However, there are languages in this class which are not positional on two-player arenas. For example, the property L = aω ∨ bω , which says that either we only see a or we only see b;the residuals RL(a) = {aω } and RL(b) = {bω } are incomparable. For games without a given starting state, we require that the language has totally ordered residuals (see Section 3.1). A finite-memory strategy now generates an ultimately periodic play from each state - this means we can have violations of positionality ‘across’ the plays. In conjunction with the method from Proposition 6, these can be amended using totally ordered residuals, which given two partial plays ending at the same state allows us to replace the continuation of one play with the other. 

▶ Proposition 8. An ω-regular language L is uniform 1P positional iff it has totally ordered residuals and satisfies (1) and (2) from Proposition 6. 

In [ 18 ], it was shown that uniform 1P positional ω-regular languages are exactly the positional ω-regular languages. 

▶ Proposition 9 ([ 18 ]) . An ω-regular language is positional over finite Player 1 controlled edge-labelled arenas iff it is positional over all edge-labelled arenas. 

So from this we have our main result for this section, that the same conditions hold for positionality over 2P arenas: 

▶ Corollary 10. An ω-regular language L is positional iff it has totally ordered residuals and satisfies (1) and (2) from Proposition 6. 

We will discuss some corollaries of this characterisation. Firstly, these conditions allow us to give a decision procedure for checking whether an ω-regular language is positional. Given a finite algebraic object recognising a ω-regular language, we can easily check the above conditions from the multiplication table. Therefore: 

▶ Corollary 11. Given a Wilke algebra S = ( S+, S ω ) recognising a language L ⊆ Σω , we can determine whether L is positional in polynomial time.  

> 2Note the results from the previous section do not necessarily apply to non-uniform 1P positional languages, as this class of languages does not require totally ordered residuals.

J. Newman and B. Plummer 23:9 

Unfortunately, unlike in the non-uniform 1P case, languages positional over 2P arenas are not closed under finite union in general, as the union of two languages with totally ordered residuals may not necessarily have totally ordered residuals. However, we can take a finite union in restricted circumstances: 

▶ Corollary 12. Given a finite set L of positional ω-regular languages, the union ∪L is positional iff ∪L has totally ordered set of residuals. 

Prefix-independent ω-regular languages are such that |R(L) = {L}| = 1 [3]. Therefore, if we have an arbitrary ω−regular language L1 and a prefix-independent ω-regular language L2,then R(L1 ∪ L2) = {X ∪ L2|X ∈ R(L1)}. Therefore, if R(L1) is totally ordered then so is 

R(L1 ∪ L2), so a special case of the above corollary is the (known [ 18 ]) fact that the union of a positional ω-regular language and prefix-independent ω-regular language will be positional. 

# 3.3 Prefix-Independent Languages 

The class of prefix-independent languages, where only the infinite behaviour of a word affects membership, is important in verification. We provide a condition characterising the positional ω-regular prefix-independent languages, and follow with a concrete description of a class of such languages. Applying our characterisation in Corollary 10, we find that prefix-independent languages trivially meet many of the conditions: 

▶ Proposition 13. A prefix-independent ω-regular language L is positional iff (uv )ω ∈ L

implies either uω ∈ L or vω ∈ L.

Note that this provides an alternate justification of the known result [ 18 , Theorem 3.4] that the class of prefix-independent ω-regular positional languages are closed under finite union. The condition in Proposition 13 is similar in form to concavity , a known sufficient condition for positionality of prefix-independent languages [31]: 

▶ Definition 14 (Concavity) . For all x, y ∈ Σω such that x = x1x2 . . . , y = y1y2 . . . and for all i, xi, y i ∈ Σ+, if x1y1x2y2 . . . ∈ L then either x ∈ L or y ∈ L.

However, concavity is not necessary for positionality, even for ω-regular prefix-independent languages, as can be seen by the following example: 

▶ Example 15. L = {w ∈ Σω | substring bb occurs finitely often in w} is prefix-independent, positional, but not concave, as (ab )ω ∈ L but neither (aabb )ω nor (bbaa )ω are. So, we can see the condition in Proposition 13 as a weakening of concavity to be both necessary and sufficient for positionality. We will use this characterisation to capture a large class of positional prefix-independent ω-regular languages. An ω-regular language is prefix-independent iff it can be expressed in the form Σ∗(R1)ω + . . . + Σ ∗(Rn)ω [ 3]. Since prefix-independent positional languages are closed under finite union [ 18 ], we will focus on languages of the form Σ∗(R)ω . The following form can express many interesting properties: 

▶ Proposition 16. Suppose a language L can be expressed in the form Σ∗(SR )ω , where 

L(S) ⊆ Σ, and L(R) ⊆ (Σ \ L(S)) ∗ is a subword-closed regular language. Then, L is prefix-independent and positional. 

This encodes a condition with both ‘liveness’ and ‘safety’, in the sense that S gives a set of labels which are seen infinitely often and R restricts the behaviour between these labels. We will provide some examples of languages in this class. In fact, Example 15 above can be 

C V I T 2 0 1 6 23:10 Positional Properties in Temporal Logic 

expressed in this form, where L(S) = Σ \ { b} and R = ( b + ε). Let us explain what is meant by L(R) being subword-closed [6]. The subword ordering on a language L is defined such that 

u ≤SU B v iff there is an increasing sequence k1, k 2, . . . k |u| such that v[k1]v[k2] . . . v [k|u|] = u

- i.e. all the characters of u can be found within v in the correct order. We can specify a subword-closed language by giving the set of minimal disallowed subwords - a word is in the language iff it does not contain any of these as a subword. The set of disallowed subwords is called the anti-dictionary . The requirement for positionality places some restrictions on the entries in the anti-dictionary: 

▶ Proposition 17. Suppose L ⊆ Σ∗ is a subword-closed language with anti-dictionary D.

L has totally-ordered residuals iff for every xy, uv ∈ D, there is some d ∈ D such that 

d ≤SU B xv or d ≤SU B uy .

With this we can define languages where we disallow a single specific subword: 

▶ Proposition 18. Every subword-closed language with a single element anti-dictionary has totally-ordered residuals. 

And we can define languages where we disallow a set of labels: 

▶ Proposition 19. If D is the anti-dictionary of a subword-closed language with totally-ordered residuals, then D ∪ { a} for any a ∈ Σ is the anti-dictionary of a subword-closed language with totally-ordered residuals. 

A Rabin condition is a finite collection of pairs (Ui, V i), where Ui must be visited infinitely often, and Vi must be visited finitely often. Since we can encode each Vi as single-character entries in an anti-dictionary, we can represent these conditions as finite unions of languages of the form Proposition 16 - this also subsumes parity conditions. Some different examples of subword-closed languages can be found in [28]. 

# 4 State-Labelled Positional Omega-Regular Languages 4.1 Language-Theoretic Characterisation 

We can characterise state-labelled ω-regular positional properties with similar conditions to those that characterise edge-labelled positional properties. Recall that a strategy is not positional whenever it visits the same state twice and prescribes different moves each time. In state-labelled arenas, since each state has a single label, we know that if we visit the same state twice the label seen will be the same each time. So, our closure conditions only need to apply when we see the same label twice, as otherwise we have not seen the same state twice. 

▶ Proposition 20. An ω-regular language L is non-uniform 1P state-labelled positional iff the following conditions hold for all u, y ∈ Σ∗, v, w, x ∈ Σ+ where v[0] = w[0] :(1) if uvwx ω ∈ L then either uv ω ∈ L or uwx ω ∈ L

(2) if u(vwy )ω ∈ L then either uvw ω ∈ L or u(wy )ω ∈ L

This can be shown with the same method as Proposition 6. These weaker requirements for positionality allow for more properties to be positional. For example, we can have properties that contain permutations of distinct labels, since violations of positionality can only occur when we see the same label twice. 

▶ Example 21. The language (abc )ω is (non-uniform) 1P state-labelled positional. J. Newman and B. Plummer 23:11 

In fact, the language in this example is also 1P uniform positional. Despite this, the language does not have a totally ordered set of residuals. This requirement is also weaker for state-positional languages; we only require that for words ending in the same label, the set of residuals is totally ordered. 

▶ Proposition 22. If L is a positional ω-regular language, then for each a ∈ Σ, the set of residuals for words ending in a, {RL(ua )|u ∈ Σ∗}, is totally ordered by inclusion. 

We can now make the analogous statement of Proposition 8, which can be shown with the same method. Additionally, similarly to the edge-labelled case, 1P uniform positionality is sufficient to characterise positionality on 2P arenas (sometimes called a 1-to-2 player lift), although demonstrating this is quite involved: our plays now form trees, so we have to show these conditions allow us to replace trees of winning plays with trees of winning plays containing fewer violations of positionality. Interestingly, the requirement for totally ordered residuals does most of the ‘work’ here, allowing us to, given two subtrees of plays rooted at the same state, replace one with the other. The other conditions enforce a similar property to progress consistency in [ 18 ]; once we have shown we can recursively nest a subtree within itself an arbitrary number of times and still have a winning play, these allow us to extend this nesting to an infinite depth and still have a winning play. 

▶ Theorem 23. The following are equivalent for an ω-regular language L:

L is non-uniform 1P state-labelled positional. 

L is positional over finite 2P arenas. For each a ∈ Σ, the set {RL(wa )|w ∈ Σ∗} is totally ordered by inclusion, and conditions (1) and (2) hold from Proposition 20. 

# 4.2 Relation to Edge-Labelled Positionality 

There is a connection between edge-labelled positional and state-labelled positional objectives. It is known that edge-labelled positional languages can be played positionally on state-labelled arenas, and that the converse is not true - there are more state-labelled positional objectives than edge-labelled [31]. We make precise the converse relation between them: 

▶ Proposition 24. An ω-regular language L is positional over state-labelled arenas iff it can be played optimally with memory of the previous label in edge-labelled arenas. 

This can be seen in the extension of the conditions for edge-labelled positionality (Corol-lary 10) to state-labelled positionality (Theorem 23) - since we can ‘see’ the previous label in state-labelled arenas, we only need that these conditions hold at points where the previous labels were equal. Proposition 13 can be extended to state-labelled positionality in the same way, giving us that the class of state-labelled positional languages is closed under finite union. Similarly to the edge-labelled case, state-labelled positional ω-regular languages are expressible in LTL . This can be shown through a very similar argument as in Section 3.1. Note that the proof of Lemma 3 also holds for languages where just the sets {RL(ua )|u ∈ Σ∗}

are totally ordered by inclusion for each a ∈ Σ, since uv i will end in the same character as uv j

for any i, j > 0. For the analogue to Lemma 4, it is simple to adapt the given counterexample to a state-labelled game, from which the same argument follows. Therefore: 

▶ Theorem 25. If a language L ⊆ Σω is ω-regular and positional over state-labelled arenas, then it is ω-star-free. 

C V I T 2 0 1 6 23:12 Positional Properties in Temporal Logic 

# 5 Varieties 

In the following section we will use ‘positional’ to refer to properties positional over edge-labelled arenas unless otherwise stated. LTL allows us to compositionally build formulae to specify properties, using temporal operators and Boolean operations. However, these operations do not respect positionality; for example: F p ∧ F q is not positional, even though both F p and F q are. We might wonder whether it is possible to construct some similar specification language closed under Boolean operations which is restricted to expressing only positional languages, thereby providing a compositional syntax for specifying positional properties. To this end, we will investigate varieties of positional languages - classes of positional languages closed under certain combinations of Boolean operations. It is known that varieties of languages correspond to varieties of ω-semigroups, so the (non)existence of varieties of ω-semigroups that recognise only positional languages will determine the (non)existence of Boolean-closed classes of positional languages. An overview of recognition of languages by ω-semigroups can be found in [ 39 ], and an overview of the correspondence between language varieties and varieties can be found in [ 40 ]. For algebraic convenience, we will be deal with sets of mixed finite and infinite words, i.e. subsets of Σ∞. However, our claims will only focus on the infinite part of the languages, so for any definition relating to ω-languages (prefix-independence, positionality, etc.), we take L ⊆ Σ∞ to meet these definitions when L ∩ Σω meets these definitions. Firstly, we find that prefix-independent languages are closed under Boolean operations, taking residuals, and pre-images of free ω-semigroup morphisms, so form an ∞-variety. Furthermore, each corresponding ω-semigroup (S+, S ω ) has the property that the mixed product mapping S+ × Sω → Sω is right projection, so uv 7 → v for all u ∈ S+, v ∈ Sω . This gives us the following: 

▶ Proposition 26. Prefix-independent languages form an ∞-variety corresponding to the identity uv = v for u ∈ Σ∗, v ∈ Σω .

However, if we attempt to find within this a variety consisting of positional prefix-independent languages, we can only find trivial examples: 

▶ Proposition 27. If V is an ∞-variety consisting entirely of prefix-independent positional languages, then the only ω-languages it contains are ∅ and Σω .

This places some restrictions on varieties of positional languages in general. Suppose we have a variety V entirely consisting of positional languages. If this contained a prefix-independent language L, the variety generated by L must be prefix-independent (by Proposi-tion 26) and must be a subvariety of V. This would give us a variety of prefix-independent languages, which we know to be impossible by the above. Therefore: 

▶ Corollary 28. An ∞-variety containing only positional languages must not contain a (non-trivial) prefix-independent language. 

However if we drop closure under negation, we can find a positive variety (closed under union and intersection) of prefix-independent positional languages: 

▶ Proposition 29. The class of languages containing, for each alphabet Σ, the languages of the form F G (A1) ∪ . . . ∪ F G (An) where Ai ⊆ Σ form a positive ∞-variety. 

This suggests we may be able to find more specification languages for positional properties if we drop the need for closure under all Boolean operations. J. Newman and B. Plummer 23:13 

# 6 Applications to Temporal Logic 

In the domain of temporal logic, Corollary 28 tell us that we must restrict the path formula in ATL * drastically to obtain a positional semantics - one where only positional strategies are considered - which agrees with the memoryful semantics. Despite this, we examine two such restrictions. We consider two fragments of ATL ∗ where we add GF φ ∧ F Gψ , and G(φU ψ ),to the path formula of ATL , respectively. We see these as natural choices of path formula, because in one-agent ATL (i.e. CTL ), these give us the ability to express Rabin objectives (which subsume parity, and maintain positionality wrt the first player), and Rabin objectives 

with a safety objective, respectively. These claims are substantiated shortly in Proposition 34. As mentioned in the introduction, we achieve efficient model checking for restrictions of 

ATL * with positional path formula, by reducing the problem to LTL model checking (which is in PSPACE). Given a formula φ in the positional fragment of LTL , to determine whether 

φ holds at a state x, it suffices to (non-deterministically) enumerate positional Player 1 strategies in the game, and do universal model checking on the LTL formula φ on the resulting transition system at x. We can say more when the formula φ is bipositional. First note that 

existential LTL model checking of a positional path formulae φ is in NP, as we can guess a positional strategy to generate an ultimately periodic trace pl ω where |pl | is at most the number of states, which can be checked in time O(|pl | · | φ|)[34 ]. So, if φ is bipositional, then 

¬φ is positional and checking Aφ ≡ ¬ E¬φ is in co-NP. Therefore, ATL * model-checking of bipositional properties is in Σp 

> 2

(i.e. in NP given a co-NP oracle [ 5]), by guessing a positional strategy for P1 and using the oracle to verify Aφ . These facts yield the following: 

▶ Proposition 30. The model checking problem for any positional fragment of ATL ∗ is in PSPACE. The model checking problem for any bipositional fragment of ATL ∗ is in Σp

> 2

.

We now verify that adding various path formula of interest to ATL maintains positionality of the semantics. 

▶ Proposition 31. If we add any of the following composite LTL modalities to the path formula of ATL , the semantics remains positional: GF φ ∧ F Gψ , G(φU ψ ), GF φ ∧ F Gψ ∧ Gϕ ,and G(φ ∨ Xφ ).

Proof sketch. The first formula generates a prefix-independent set of traces, so it suffices to verify the conditions of Proposition 13. For the remaining three, the claim follows from verifying the conditions in Corollary 10, as every property positional on edge-labelled arenas is positional on state-labelled arenas. ◀

When adding in two of the path formula considered in Proposition 31 to ATL , it turns out we obtain logics of equal expressive power. 

▶ Proposition 32. ATL + GF ∧ F G ∧ G and ATL + GU are mutually expressive. 

Proof sketch. The following equivalences can be routinely verified: ⟨C⟩(GF ψ ∧F Gφ ∧Gϕ ) ≡⟨C⟩(ϕU (⟨C⟩(G(( φ ∧ ϕ)U (ψ ∧ φ ∧ ϕ))) and ⟨C⟩(GψU φ ) ≡ ⟨ C⟩(GF φ ∧ F G ⊤ ∧ G(ψ ∨ φ)) . ◀▶ Remark 33. GR(1) synthesis [ 10 ] restricts LTL specifications to an implication from a conjunction of Büchi conditions to a conjunction of Büchi conditions, to obtain a polynomial-time synthesis algorithm. Our positional fragments are incomparable to this approach, as 

FG p ∧ GF q is not directly expressible in GR(1), and we cannot express conjunctions of Büchi conditions as they are not positional (and are inexpressible in our fragments, see 40). We leave a detailed comparison to future work. 

C V I T 2 0 1 6 23:14 Positional Properties in Temporal Logic 

Over models with a single player, we now show that adding GF φ ∧ F Gψ (GφU ψ ) to path formula lets us express Rabin conditions (Rabin and safety conditions). Recall a Rabin condition is a finite collection of pairs (Ui, V i), where Ui must be visited infinitely often, and 

Vi must be visited finitely often. We say we can encode a Rabin condition in a fragment of 

CTL * when, given Ui and Vi are denoted by propositional variables ui and vi, we can write a formula which holds precisely when the Rabin condition is satisfied. In a similar fashion, we can speak of safety conditions, where some set W must never be visited, being encoded in a fragment of CTL *. The following proposition crucially relies on disjunctions distributing over 

E in CTL *, thus may not apply to the corresponding fragments of ATL *. 

▶ Proposition 34. The fragment CTL + GF ∧ F G can encode a Rabin condition. The fragment CTL + GU can encode a Rabin condition combined with a safety condition. 

Proof. We show the second claim. Given a Rabin condition (ui, v i) indexed by a finite set I and a safety condition w (both encoded as atomic propositions), we can write a formula equivalent to E(∨ 

> i∈I

(GF u i ∧ F Gv i) ∧ Gw ), using distributivity of E over ∨, and Proposition 32. ◀

Note that parity conditions are subsumed by Rabin conditions, so can be expressed by both fragments in Proposition 34. 

# 6.1 Inexpressivity results 

In the remainder of this section, we make various inexpressivity claims for our different positional fragments, along with EATL (where GF and F G path formula are permitted), and EAT L+ (where we further allow Boolean combinations of path formula). We collect the claims in the following theorem, the proofs of which will follow. 

▶ Theorem 35. Let > denote the strictly more expressive than relation, we have the following: 

ATL [27 ]

= ATL + (37) 

< EATL (38) 

< ATL + GF ∧ F G (39) 

< AT L + GU (40) 

< EATL + (41) 

< ATL ∗

Furthermore, EATL + cannot express all state-labelled positional properties. 

Recall that the standard procedure for showing inexpressibility results in temporal logic (see e.g. [ 21 , Lemma 10.3.2]) is to show that a formula in one logic picks out a class of models, which cannot be expressed by the other. It turns out, that to compare our fragments, it is often sufficient to perform this procedure on just the one-agent restrictions of our logics: 

▶ Lemma 36. Let A be a set of (possibly composite) LTL modalites, and φ be an LTL formula. Suppose we have two families of rooted transition systems {M n}n∈N and {N n}n∈N, for which 

Mn ⊨ ∃φ and Nn ⊭ ∃φ for all n, and where Mn and Nn cannot be distinguished by any 

CT L + A formula of modal depth less than n. This is enough to show that ⟨i⟩φ is not expressible in ATL + A, for some agent i ∈ Ag .

In [ 23 , Theorem 4.4], the authors show that CT L + < ECT L by proving E(GF p ) is not expressible in CT L + using the assumption of Lemma 36, thus we have as a corollary: 

▶ Corollary 37. ⟨i⟩GF p is not expressible in ATL +.

To separate EATL and ATL + GF ∧ F G , we can show the assumptions of Lemma 36 are satisfied by adapting the proof of [ 32 , Lemma 2.8.4], where it is shown that E(GF p ∧ Gq )

distinguishes two classes of models for which no ECTL formula can. It turns out that 

E(GF p ∧ F Gq ) also distinguishes the same two classes of models. J. Newman and B. Plummer 23:15 

▶ Proposition 38. ⟨i⟩(GF p ∧ F Gq ) is not expressible in EATL .

It easily follows from Proposition 32, that ATL + GU is as at least as expressive as 

ATL + GF ∧ F G . To show it is strictly more, we can construct two classes of rooted transitions systems which satisfy Lemma 36 by hand. 

▶ Proposition 39. ⟨i⟩(GpU q ) is not expressible in ATL + GF ∧ F G .

We can easily see EATL + is at least as expressive as ATL + GU , by using Proposition 32 and the fact that GF φ ∧ F Gψ ∧ Gψ is a Boolean combination of EATL path formulas. To get that EATL + is strictly more expressive, we can show the models given in the proof of 

ECT L < ECT L + in [ 23 , Theorem 4.3] cannot be distinguished by ATL + GU formulas, and apply Lemma 36. 

▶ Proposition 40. ⟨i⟩(GF p ∧ GF q ) is not expressible in ATL + GU .

The formula EG (p ∨ Xp ) was shown not to be expressible in ECT L + in [ 23 , Theorem 4.2]. Again, we can use two classes of models to apply Lemma 36, thus we obtain: 

▶ Corollary 41. ⟨i⟩G(p ∨ Xp ) is not expressible in EATL +

This corollary tells us two things: firstly that ATL ∗ is strictly more expressive than EATL +, and secondly that not all positional properties are expressible in EATL + (we saw in Proposition 31 that G(p ∨ Xp ) is a positional property). 

# 7 Conclusion 

We have shown that positional ω-regular languages are ω-star-free, and provided a language-theoretic characterisation of these languages to complement the automata-theoretic character-isation of [ 18 ]. We have applied these results to problems in temporal logic. Firstly, a negative result showing we cannot find a property specification language closed under Boolean opera-tions which expresses only positional and prefix-independent properties. Secondly, we have presented various fragments of ATL ∗ with positional path formulae (and so more tractable model-checking), and shown where they fall expressively in the hierarchy of ATL ∗ fragments. We present directions for future work. Further work is required to refine exactly where positional ω-regular languages are situated within the hierarchy of sub-ω-regular languages -for instance, do they span the entire dot-depth hierarchy [ 41 ]? We also do not know whether there are ω-regular 1P non-uniform positional languages which are not ω-star-free. On another note, totally-ordered residuals are a key requirement for positionality, but they are not entirely understood. Some work has been done for the finite case in [ 28 ], where they are termed ‘Ferrers languages’. Due to Corollary 12, it would be good to know exactly when the union of two languages has totally ordered residuals. It would also be interesting to know whether there are any non-trivial varieties consisting entirely of positional languages. Additionally, in the domain of finite languages, there are variety theorems for several restricted combinations of Boolean operations, e.g. disjunctive varieties [ 43 ], basic varieties [ 8 ]. If these can be extended to ω-languages, then we can find classes of positional languages which are instances of these weaker types of variety, which may provide canonical algebraic identities to classify these languages. Finally, since ATL + is expressible in ATL [27 ], there may be an analogue of Proposition 34 which holds for ATL ∗ through a similar construction. 

C V I T 2 0 1 6 23:16 Positional Properties in Temporal Logic 

References 

1 E. Allen Emerson and Chin-Laung Lei. Modalities for model checking: branching time logic strikes back. Science of Computer Programming , 8(3):275–306, 1987. URL: 

https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/0167642387900360 , doi:10.1016/ 0167-6423(87)90036-0 .

2 Rajeev Alur, Thomas A. Henzinger, and Orna Kupferman. Alternating-time temporal logic. 

J. ACM , 49(5):672–713, September 2002. doi:10.1145/585265.585270 .

3 Dana Angluin and Dana Fisman. Regular ω-languages with an informative right con-gruence. Information and Computation , 278:104598, 2021. Special Issue on Ninth In-ternational Symposium on Games, Automata, Logics and Formal Verification (GandALF 2018). URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0890540120300869 ,

doi:10.1016/j.ic.2020.104598 .

4 André Arnold. A syntactic congruence for rational ω-languages. Theoretical Computer Science , 39:333–335, 1985. Third Conference on Foundations of Software Technology and Theoretical Computer Science. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/ pii/0304397585901483 , doi:10.1016/0304-3975(85)90148-3 .

5 Sanjeev Arora and Boaz Barak. The polynomial hierarchy and alternations , page 95–105. Cambridge University Press, 2009. 

6 A. Atminas and V. Lozin. Deciding atomicity of subword-closed languages. Theoretical Computer Science , 1003:114595, 2024. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/ article/pii/S030439752400210X , doi:10.1016/j.tcs.2024.114595 .

7 Alessandro Bianco, Marco Faella, Fabio Mogavero, and Aniello Murano. Exploring the boundary of half-positionality. Annals of Mathematics and Artificial Intelligence , 62(1):55–77, Jun 2011. doi:10.1007/s10472-011-9250-1 .

8 Fabian Birkmann, Stefan Milius, and Henning Urbat. On language varieties without boolean operations. In Language and Automata Theory and Applications: 15th International Conference, LATA 2021, Milan, Italy, March 1–5, 2021, Proceedings , page 3–15, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2021. Springer-Verlag. doi:10.1007/978-3-030-68195-1_1 .

9 Roderick Bloem, Krishnendu Chatterjee, and Barbara Jobstmann. Graph Games and Reactive Synthesis , pages 921–962. Springer International Publishing, Cham, 2018. doi:10.1007/ 978-3-319-10575-8_27 .

10 Roderick Bloem, Barbara Jobstmann, Nir Piterman, Amir Pnueli, and Yaniv Sa’ar. Synthesis of reactive(1) designs. Journal of Computer and System Sciences , 78(3):911–938, 2012. In Commemoration of Amir Pnueli. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/ pii/S0022000011000869 , doi:10.1016/j.jcss.2011.08.007 .

11 Patricia Bouyer, Antonio Casares, Mickael Randour, and Pierre Vandenhove. Half-Positional Objectives Recognized by Deterministic Büchi Automata. In Bartek Klin, Sławomir Lasota, and Anca Muscholl, editors, 33rd International Conference on Concurrency Theory (CON-CUR 2022) , volume 243 of Leibniz International Proceedings in Informatics (LIPIcs) , pages 20:1–20:18, Dagstuhl, Germany, 2022. Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik. URL: https://drops.dagstuhl.de/entities/document/10.4230/LIPIcs.CONCUR.2022.20 ,

doi:10.4230/LIPIcs.CONCUR.2022.20 .

12 Patricia Bouyer, Mickael Randour, and Pierre Vandenhove. Characterizing omega-regularity through finite-memory determinacy of games on infinite graphs. TheoretiCS , Volume 2, Jan 2023. URL: https://theoretics.episciences.org/9608 , doi:10.46298/theoretics.23.1 .

13 J. Richard Büchi and Lawrence H. Landweber. Solving sequential conditions by finite-state strategies. Transactions of the American Mathematical Society , 138(0):295–311, 1969. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1090/S0002-9947-1969-0280205-0 , doi:10.1090/ s0002-9947-1969-0280205-0 .

14 Nils Bulling and Wojciech Jamroga. Comparing variants of strategic ability: how uncertainty and memory influence general properties of games. Autonomous Agents and Multi-Agent Systems , 28(3):474–518, May 2014. doi:10.1007/s10458-013-9231-3 .J. Newman and B. Plummer 23:17 

15 Simon Busard, Charles Pecheur, Hongyang Qu, and Franco Raimondi. Reasoning about memoryless strategies under partial observability and unconditional fairness constraints. 

Information and Computation , 242:128–156, 2015. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/ science/article/pii/S0890540115000292 , doi:10.1016/j.ic.2015.03.014 .

16 Hugues Calbrix, Maurice Nivat, and Andreas Podelski. Ultimately periodic words of rational 

ω-languages. In Stephen Brookes, Michael Main, Austin Melton, Michael Mislove, and David Schmidt, editors, Mathematical Foundations of Programming Semantics , pages 554–566, Berlin, Heidelberg, 1994. Springer Berlin Heidelberg. 

17 Olivier Carton, Dominique Perrin, and Jean-Eric Pin. Automata and semigroups recognizing infinite words. In E. Grädel J. Flum and T. Wilke, editors, Logic and Automata, History and perspectives , pages 585–596. Amsterdam University Press, 2007. URL: https://hal.science/ hal-00340797 .

18 Antonio Casares and Pierre Ohlmann. Positional ω-regular languages. TheoretiCS , Volume 5, Feb 2026. URL: https://theoretics.episciences.org/14945 , doi:10.46298/theoretics. 26.5 .

19 Thomas Colcombet, Nathanaël Fijalkow, and Florian Horn. Playing safe, ten years later. 

Logical Methods in Computer Science , Volume 20, Issue 1, Jan 2024. URL: https://lmcs. episciences.org/10547 , doi:10.46298/lmcs-20(1:10)2024 .

20 Thomas Colcombet and Damian Niwiński. On the positional determinacy of edge-labeled games. 

Theoretical Computer Science , 352(1):190–196, 2006. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/ science/article/pii/S0304397505008303 , doi:10.1016/j.tcs.2005.10.046 .

21 Stéphane Demri, Valentin Goranko, and Martin Lange. Temporal Logics in Computer Sci-ence: Finite-State Systems . Cambridge Tracts in Theoretical Computer Science. Cambridge University Press, 2016. 

22 Volker Diekert and Paul Gastin. First-order definable languages. In Jörg Flum, Erich Grädel, and Thomas Wilke, editors, Logic and Automata: History and Perspectives [in Honor of Wolfgang Thomas] , Texts in Logic and Games, pages 261–306. Amsterdam University Press, 2008. 

23 E. Allen Emerson and Joseph Y. Halpern. "sometimes" and "not never" revisited: on branching versus linear time (preliminary report). In Proceedings of the 10th ACM SIGACT-SIGPLAN Symposium on Principles of Programming Languages , POPL ’83, page 127–140, New York, NY, USA, 1983. Association for Computing Machinery. doi:10.1145/567067.567081 .

24 E.A. Emerson and C.S. Jutla. Tree automata, mu-calculus and determinacy. In [1991] Proceedings 32nd Annual Symposium of Foundations of Computer Science , pages 368–377, 1991. doi:10.1109/SFCS.1991.185392 .

25 Patrick Gardy, Patricia Bouyer, and Nicolas Markey. Dependences in Strategy Logic. In Rolf Niedermeier and Brigitte Vallée, editors, 35th Symposium on Theoretical Aspects of Computer Science (STACS 2018) , volume 96 of Leibniz International Proceedings in Informatics (LIPIcs) , pages 34:1–34:15, Dagstuhl, Germany, 2018. Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik. URL: https://drops.dagstuhl.de/entities/document/10.4230/LIPIcs. STACS.2018.34 , doi:10.4230/LIPIcs.STACS.2018.34 .

26 Hugo Gimbert and Wiesław Zielonka. Games where you can play optimally without any memory. In Martín Abadi and Luca de Alfaro, editors, CONCUR 2005 – Concurrency Theory ,pages 428–442, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2005. Springer Berlin Heidelberg. 

27 Aidan Harding, Mark Ryan, and Pierre-Yves Schobbens. Approximating atl* in atl. In Agostino Cortesi, editor, Verification, Model Checking, and Abstract Interpretation , pages 289–301, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2002. Springer Berlin Heidelberg. 

28 Kabil, Mustapha and Pouzet, Maurice. Injective envelopes of transition systems and ferrers languages*. RAIRO-Theor. Inf. Appl. , 54:4, 2020. doi:10.1051/ita/2020005 .

29 Eryk Kopczyński. Half-positional determinacy of infinite games. In Michele Bugliesi, Bart Pren-eel, Vladimiro Sassone, and Ingo Wegener, editors, Automata, Languages and Programming ,pages 336–347, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2006. Springer Berlin Heidelberg. 

C V I T 2 0 1 6 23:18 Positional Properties in Temporal Logic 

30 Eryk Kopczyński. Omega-regular half-positional winning conditions. In Jacques Duparc and Thomas A. Henzinger, editors, Computer Science Logic , pages 41–53, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2007. Springer Berlin Heidelberg. 

31 Eryk Kopczyński. Half-positional determinacy of infinite games . PhD thesis, University of Warsaw, 2014. 

32 François Laroussinie. Logique temporelle avec passé pour la spécification et la vérification des systèmes réactifs . PhD thesis, Grenoble INP, 1994. Thèse de doctorat dirigée par Schnoebelen, Philippe Informatique Grenoble INPG 1994. URL: http://www.theses.fr/1994INPG0136 .

33 Oded Maler and Ludwig Staiger. On syntactic congruences for ω-languages. 

Theoretical Computer Science , 183(1):93–112, 1997. Formal Language Theory. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S030439759600312X , doi: 10.1016/S0304-3975(96)00312-X .

34 Nicolas Markey and Philippe Schnoebelen. Model Checking a Path (Preliminary Report). In Amadio, Roberto M., Lugiez, and Denis, editors, Lecture Notes in Computer Science , volume 2761 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science , pages 251–265, Marseilles, France, 2003. Springer. URL: https://hal.science/hal-01194626 , doi:10.1007/b11938 .

35 Robert McNaughton. Testing and generating infinite sequences by a finite automaton. Inform-ation and Control , 9(5):521–530, 1966. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/ article/pii/S001999586680013X , doi:10.1016/S0019-9958(66)80013-X .

36 Fabio Mogavero, Aniello Murano, and Luigi Sauro. A behavioral hierarchy of strategy logic. In Nils Bulling, Leendert van der Torre, Serena Villata, Wojtek Jamroga, and Wamberto Vasconcelos, editors, Computational Logic in Multi-Agent Systems , pages 148–165, Cham, 2014. Springer International Publishing. 

37 Pierre Ohlmann. Characterizing positionality in games of infinite duration over infinite graphs. TheoretiCS , Volume 2, Jan 2023. URL: https://theoretics.episciences.org/9724 ,

doi:10.46298/theoretics.23.3 .

38 Pierre Ohlmann and Michał Skrzypczak. Positionality in Σ02 and a Completeness Result. In Olaf Beyersdorff, Mamadou Moustapha Kanté, Orna Kupferman, and Daniel Lokshtanov, editors, 

41st International Symposium on Theoretical Aspects of Computer Science (STACS 2024) ,volume 289 of Leibniz International Proceedings in Informatics (LIPIcs) , pages 54:1–54:18, Dagstuhl, Germany, 2024. Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik. URL: https: //drops.dagstuhl.de/entities/document/10.4230/LIPIcs.STACS.2024.54 , doi:10.4230/ LIPIcs.STACS.2024.54 .

39 Dominique Perrin and Jean Éric Pin. Ii - automata and semigroups. In Dominique Perrin and Jean Éric Pin, editors, Infinite Words , volume 141 of Pure and Applied Mathematics ,pages 75–131. Elsevier, 2004. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/ pii/S0079816904800035 , doi:10.1016/S0079-8169(04)80003-5 .

40 Dominique Perrin and Jean Éric Pin. Vi - varieties. In Dominique Perrin and Jean Éric Pin, editors, Infinite Words , volume 141 of Pure and Applied Mathematics , pages 265–306. Elsevier, 2004. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0079816904800072 ,

doi:10.1016/S0079-8169(04)80007-2 .

41 Jean-Eric Pin. The dot-depth hierarchy, 45 years later. In Stavros Konstantinidis, Nelma Mor-eira, Rogério Reis, and Jeffrey Shallit, editors, The Role of Theory in Computer Science - Essays Dedicated to Janusz Brzozowski , The Role of Theory in Computer Science - Essays Dedicated to Janusz Brzozowski. World Scientific, 2017. URL: https://hal.science/hal-01614357 ,

doi:10.1142/9789813148208\_0008 .

42 Amir Pnueli. The temporal logic of programs. In 18th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (sfcs 1977) , pages 46–57, 1977. doi:10.1109/SFCS.1977.32 .

43 Libor Polák. A classification of rational languages by semilattice-ordered monoids. Archivum Mathematicum , 040(4):395–406, 2004. URL: http://eudml.org/doc/249314 .

44 J. Richard Büchi. Symposium on decision problems: On a decision method in restricted second order arithmetic. In Ernest Nagel, Patrick Suppes, and Alfred Tarski, editors, Logic, J. Newman and B. Plummer 23:19 

Methodology and Philosophy of Science , volume 44 of Studies in Logic and the Foundations of Mathematics , pages 1–11. Elsevier, 1966. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/ article/pii/S0049237X09705646 , doi:10.1016/S0049-237X(09)70564-6 .

45 Pierre-Yves Schobbens. Alternating-time logic with imperfect recall. Electronic Notes in Theoretical Computer Science , 85(2):82–93, 2004. LCMAS 2003, Logic and Communication in Multi-Agent Systems. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/ S1571066105826040 , doi:10.1016/S1571-0661(05)82604-0 .

46 A. P. Sistla and E. M. Clarke. The complexity of propositional linear temporal logics. J. ACM ,32(3):733–749, July 1985. doi:10.1145/3828.3837 .

47 Pierre Vandenhove. Strategy complexity of zero-sum games on graphs . Theses, Université Paris-Saclay ; Université de Mons (Belgique), April 2023. URL: https://theses.hal.science/ tel-04095220 .

48 Pierre Wolper. Temporal logic can be more expressive. Information and Control , 56(1):72–99, 1983. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0019995883800515 ,

doi:10.1016/S0019-9958(83)80051-5 .

49 Wieslaw Zielonka. Infinite games on finitely coloured graphs with applications to automata on infinite trees. Theoretical Computer Science , 200(1):135–183, 1998. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0304397598000097 , doi: 10.1016/S0304-3975(98)00009-7 .

C V I T 2 0 1 6 23:20 Positional Properties in Temporal Logic 

# A Omitted Proofs 

▶ Proposition 2. An ω-regular language L ⊆ Σω is ω-star-free iff it is counter-free and 

ω-counter-free. 

Proof. ( = ⇒ ) Suppose L is ω-star-free. This means it is recognised by a finite aperiodic monoid. That is, a monoid M where for each x ∈ M , it is the case that for some n, xn = xn+m

for all m. Call the monoid M and the recognising homomorphism h. First, we show counter-freeness. Take some uvw ∈ Σω . We know that M is aperiodic, so h(v)n = h(v)n+m for some n and all m. Since h is a monoid homomorphism, h(vn) = h(vn+m). Therefore, 

uv nw ∼h uv n+mw so uv nw ∈ L iff uv n+mw ∈ L. We now have an n for each u, v, w at which membership of L no longer changes, but to show the language is counter free we need to show there is single n that works across every word. Since M is finite, we can take the least 

n such that xn = xn+1 for all x ∈ M . Taking this n, we know that there exists an n such that uv nw ∈ L iff uv n+mw ∈ L as required. The argument is similar to show L is ω-counter-free. We know that given some u, v, x, y ∈

Σ∗, taking the n for which h(xn) = h(xn+m), that u(vx ny)ω ∼h u(vx n+my)ω , and therefore 

u(vx ny)ω ∈ L iff u(vx n+my)ω ∈ L. Again, we take the least n such that xn = xn+1 for all 

x ∈ M and we have that there exists an n such that for all u, v, x, y ∈ Σ∗ it is the case that 

u(vx ny)ω ∈ L iff u(vx n+my)ω ∈ L as required. 

( ⇐= ) Given an ω-regular L, let us suppose it also is counter-free and ω-counter-free. Since it is ω-regular, then by [ 4] the following syntactic congruence is finite and saturates L:

w ≈ w′ iff for all u, v 1, v 2 ∈ Σ∗, v1wv 2uω ∈ L iff v1w′v2uω ∈ L and u(v1wv 2)ω ∈ L iff 

u(v1w′v2)ω

We take the finite monoid Σ∗/ ≈ where multiplication is defined as [s] · [t] = [ s · t]. It can be seen that the function [−] : Σ ∗ → Σ∗/ ≈ that maps x 7 → [x] is a monoid homomorphism that recognises L. We will show that Σ∗/ ≈ is aperiodic, giving us a finite aperiodic monoid that recognises L.Take some arbitrary [x] ∈ Σ∗/ ≈. We know since L is CF and ω-CF there exists an 

n1 such that for any u, v ∈ Σ∗,w ∈ Σω , it is the case that uv n1 w ∈ L iff uv n1+mw ∈ L for all m. We also know there exists an n2 such that for any u, v, x, y ∈ Σ∗, u(vx n2 y)ω ∈ L

iff u(vx n2+my)ω ∈ L for all m. Take the largest of n1, n 2 and call this n. We will show 

[x]n = [ x]n+m for all m, for which it is sufficient to show [x]n = [ x]n+1 . We know [x]n = [ xn]

and [x]n+1 = [ xn+1 ], so we just need to show that xn ≈ xn+1 .Take some arbitrary u, v 1, v 2 ∈ Σ∗. Suppose v1xnv2uω ∈ L. By CF, this is the case iff 

v1xn+1 v2uω ∈ L. Suppose u(v1xnv2)ω ∈ L. By ω-CF, this is the case iff u(v1xn+1 v2)ω ∈ L.Therefore, xn ≈ xn+1 as required. So, L is recognised by a finite aperiodic monoid and is therefore ω-star-free. ◀▶ Lemma 3. If a language L ⊆ Σω has a finite set of residuals R(L) which is totally ordered by inclusion, then it is counter-free. 

Proof. Suppose we have a language L ⊆ Σω which has a finite, totally ordered set of residuals 

R(L). We will first show that for any choice of u, v ∈ Σ∗, w ∈ Σω the word uv iw can only ‘switch’ membership of L at most once as i increases from 0. In other words, if uv 0w = uw ∈ L

and there is some uv iw / ∈ L, then uv j w ∈ L for j < i and uv kw / ∈ L for k ≥ i, and vice versa. To show this, first suppose this was not the case. We begin with the case where uw ∈ L. We would have some i, j ∈ N with 0 < i < j such that uv iw / ∈ L and uv j w ∈ L. If we take i and J. Newman and B. Plummer 23:21 

j to be the least such numbers where the language switches membership, we know that for 

0 ≤ p < i , uv pw ∈ L, and for i ≤ q < j , uv q w / ∈ L. Let us look at the residuals for the words 

uv (i−1) and uv (j−1) . We know that w ∈ RL(uv (i−1) ) and w / ∈ RL(uv (j−1) ), as uv (i−1) w ∈ L

but uv (j−1) w / ∈ L. So, RL(uv (i−1) )̸ ⊆ RL(uv (j−1) ). We know that vw / ∈ RL(uv (i−1) ) and 

vw ∈ RL(uv (j−1) ), as uv iw / ∈ L but uv j w ∈ L. Therefore, RL(uv (j−1) )̸ ⊆ RL(uv (i−1) ). So, the set of residuals cannot be totally ordered, contradicting our assumption. The argument for the case where uw / ∈ L is analogous. Therefore, it must be that for any choice of u, v, w ,the word uv iw switches membership at most once as i increases from 0. Given this, we will assume that L is not counter-free. Therefore, for all n, there exists some u, v, w, m ∈ N such that uv nw ∈ L iff uv n+mw / ∈ L. So for any n, we can find a word with substring v where the switch in membership happens at some point after v is iterated n

times. Let us call the point at which the membership switches mn for each n. Then we have the following, where mn > n :

n = 0 , u 0w0 ∈ L, u 0vm0 

> 0

w0 /∈ Ln = 1 , u 1v1w1 /∈ L, u 1vm1 

> 1

w1 ∈ Ln = 2 , u 2v22 w2 /∈ L, u 2vm2 

> 2

w2 ∈ L... 

Although this example is just illustrative; the switch in membership may happen in the other direction for any n.Note that for a given n, we generate at least n different residuals. To see this, suppose for some n = i, uv iw ∈ L and uv mi w / ∈ L. We know membership of the language can only switch once, so uv j w ∈ L for j < m i and uv j w / ∈ L for j ≥ mi. Then we can look at the residuals for each uv k where k ranges from 0 ≤ k ≤ mi. We can see that uv k+lw ∈ L iff 

k + l < m i. This means the residual RL(uv k) must be distinct from any residual RL(uv k−j )

for 1 ≤ j ≤ k, as the latter contains vmi−kw whereas the former does not, as this would take it out of the language. So, each of the residuals RL(uv 0) up to RL(uv k) are distinct sets. We can argue symmetrically for the case when uv iw / ∈ L and uv mi w ∈ L.Since the set of residuals R(L) must at least contain each of these residuals for each n, it must be infinite. If it were finite, say of size k, then it could not contain all of the distinct residuals for the case of n = k + 1 . This contradicts our assumption that R(L) is finite, so L

must in fact be counter-free. ◀▶ Lemma 4. If a language L ⊆ Σω is ω-regular and positional, then it is ω-counter-free. 

Proof. Take a language L ⊆ Σω which is ω-regular and positional. Take some arbitrary 

u, v, w, x ∈ Σ∗. We will first show that a word u(vx nw)ω cannot be out of L at some point 

n = i, in the language at some point n = j where j > i , and again out of the language at some point n = k where k > j . This means that for every word u(vx nw)ω , there is a finite 

n at which increasing n no longer changes membership of the language. First, for some 

u, v, w, x ∈ Σ∗ take i to be some value where u(vx iw)ω /∈ L, take j to be the first value such that j > i and u(vx j w)ω ∈ L, and take k to be the first value such that k > j and 

u(vx kw)ω /∈ L. Let us construct the following 2-player game with L as a winning condition, where P1 controls the square nodes: 

C V I T 2 0 1 6 23:22 Positional Properties in Temporal Logic 

. . . . . . u v

xj−1

xk−1

ϵ

xk−j

x

w

Note that P1 has a memoryful strategy which guarantees all traces are in L, by always aiming for a total of xk−1. However, no choice of positional strategy can guarantee that P1 wins, as P2 can always force either xj−1. or xk However, this is contradictory as we know by assumption that L is positional - so it must be the case there is always some value n after which u(vx nw)ω does not change membership of L.Since L is ω-regular, we can use the syntactic congruence ≈ of [ 4 ] to obtain a finite monoid that recognises L. Suppose this monoid is of size k. For each element [x] ∈ M , it must be that there is [x]n = [ x]m for some n ≤ k, n ≤ m ≤ k. Furthermore, [x]n = [ x]n+i(m−n)

for all i. So, iterating [x] eventually gives us a cycle of period m − n. Since [x]n = [ x]m =[xn] = [ xm], this also means that xn ≈ xn+i(m−n), so for any u, v, w ∈ Σ∗, u(vx nw)ω ∈ L iff 

u(vx n+i(m−n)w)ω ∈ L.We will show that for any word of the form u(vx iw)ω , the i after which it no longer switches from being in L to outside of L or vice versa is bounded by k = |Σ∗/ ≈ | + 1 . Let 

n, m be the points at which [x]n = [ x]m as detailed above. Suppose the i at which the word switches occurs on i = ( n + j(m − n)) for some j. Since, by the above, u(vx nw)ω ∈ L iff 

u(vx n+i(m−n)w)ω ∈ L, the switch would have to happen at u(vx nw)ω , and n < k . Suppose the i at which the final switch occurs at some n + j(m − n) < i < n + ( j + 1)( m − n)

for some j > 0. Either u(vw (n+j(m−n)) x)ω (and therefore also u(vw (n+( j+1)( m−n)) x)ω )is in L and u(vw ix)ω is not in L or vice versa. However, as i is the value of the final switch, u(vw (n+( j+1)( m−n)) x)ω must be in L iff u(vw ix)ω is in L, which contradicts the previous statement. So, it must be that if the word switches membership it occurs at n or earlier. Therefore, the switch must occur before k, so k is such that for any u, v, w, x ∈ Σ∗,

u(vw kx)ω ∈ L iff u(vw k+lx)ω ∈ L for all l, as required for ω-CF. ◀▶ Proposition 7. ω-regular non-uniform 1P positional languages are closed under finite union. 

Proof. Given a finite set L of such languages, take the union ∪L. Take any trace uvw ω ∈ ∪ L;this trace must also be in some ω-regular non-uniform 1P positional language L ∈ L.Therefore either uv ω ∈ L or uwx ω ∈ L, so one of these is in ∪L. Similarly for any trace 

u(vwx )ω ∈ ∪ L. Therefore ∪L meets both conditions for positionality, and as a finite union of ω-regular languages must also be ω-regular. ◀▶ Proposition 6. An ω-regular language L is 1P positional 3 iff for all u, y ∈ Σ∗, v, w, x ∈ Σ+:(1) if uvwx ω ∈ L then either uv ω ∈ L or uwx ω ∈ L

(2) if u(vwy )ω ∈ L then either uvw ω ∈ L or u(vy )ω ∈ L

Proof. ( ⇐= ) Suppose we have a winning strategy from a given initial state s over a 1P arena (V, δ ) with winning condition L. Since L is ω-regular, we have a finite-memory winning strategy with memory states M . Let us consider the play beginning at s generated by this strategy. There are at most |V | × | M | possible configurations of states and memory states,  

> 3Note the results from the previous section do not necessarily apply to non-uniform 1P positional languages, as this class of languages does not require totally ordered residuals.

J. Newman and B. Plummer 23:23 

and clearly the play will begin looping once the same configuration is seen twice, which must happen within |V | × | M | + 1 steps. Therefore this strategy will generate an ultimately periodic play pl ω ⊆ δω with prefix p ⊆ δ∗ and infinitely looping section l ⊆ δ+. Suppose in the course of the play, we see the same state twice but select a different edge each time, meaning our strategy is not positional. i.e. the play contains for some v ∈ V , two edges 

e1, e 2 ∈ δ such that src (e1) = src (e2) = v but e1̸ = e2. We can use conditions (1) and (2) to modify our play to remove this violation of positionality in such a way that we still generate a winning ultimately periodic play. We will count the number of violations in a finite sequence of edges p ∈ δ+ as vio (p) = Σ v∈V count (p, v ) where count (p, v ) = 0 if for all edges e1, e 2 in p such that src (e1) = src (e2) = v then e1 = e2, and otherwise count (p, v ) is the number of indices i in p at which src (p[i]) = v. It can be seen that once vio (p) = 0 , then for any p1p2 = p, the ultimately periodic play p1pω 

> 2

will contain no two edges e1, e 2 where 

src (e1) = src (e2) but e1̸ = e2.Let us first look at violations where at least one of these violating edges is in the prefix 

p; we will use condition (1) to fix these. Suppose our play generates the trace uvwx ω ∈ L.We refer to the segments of the play which generate u, v, w, and x as p1, p 2, p 3 and p4

respectively. Suppose p2[0] = e1 and p3[0] = e2 for two violating edges which begin from the same state as described earlier. If uv ω ∈ L, we can replace the play pl ω with the winning play p1pω 

> 2

, which generates the trace uv ω . Otherwise, uwx ω ∈ L, and we replace pl ω with 

p1p3pω 

> 4

, which generates uwx ω .For violations entirely within l, we must alter the strategy to remove this at every instance of l within pl ω . Therefore, we will require condition (2). Suppose our play generates a trace 

u(vwx )ω ∈ L, where l = l1l2l3 st. l1 generates v, l2 generates w, l3 generates x, and l2 and 

l3 begin on the same state but select different edges. Suppose uvw ω ∈ L; then can replace 

pl ω with pl 1lω 

> 2

. Otherwise, u(vx )ω ∈ L and we can replace pl ω with p(l1l3)ω .Each application of these conditions replaces our play pl ω with a new ultimately periodic play p′l′ω . Let us denote by cycle a sequence of edges e1 . . . e n such that src (e1) = tgt (en). It can be seen that p′l′ω is a valid play on our arena, since we have either fixed our play to end on a cycle which already existed in our original play, or we have cut out a cycle which existed in our original play. Additionally, it can be seen that vio (p′l′) < vio (pl ), i.e. p′l′ has strictly fewer violations of positionality than pl , and moreover |p′l′| < |pl |. Since pl is finite, there are finitely many violations of positionality within pl , and once pl contains no violations of positionality then pl ω contains no violations of positionality. Therefore, we can remove all violations of positionality with a finite number of applications of these conditions, leaving us with a play where a given state is always followed by the same edge. From this it is simple to construct a positional strategy which generates this play from the same initial state. ( =⇒ ) Let us take an ω-regular language L which is non-uniform 1P positional. Suppose for some uvwx ω ∈ L, neither uv ω ∈ L nor uwx ω ∈ L. Then, L would not be positional in the following game, where P1 controls all nodes: 

u w

v

x

Suppose for some u(vwx )ω ∈ L, neither uvw ω ∈ L nor u(vx )ω ∈ L. Then, L would not be positional in the following game where P1 controls all nodes: 

u v w

x

C V I T 2 0 1 6 23:24 Positional Properties in Temporal Logic 

◀▶ Proposition 8. An ω-regular language L is uniform 1P positional iff it has totally ordered residuals and satisfies (1) and (2) from Proposition 6. 

Proof. For the left-to-right direction, recall that we require totally ordered residuals for positionality. For the right-to-left direction, suppose we have a finite-memory strategy over a 1P arena, which is winning from states W ⊆ V . For each w ∈ W , the strategy generates an ultimately periodic play ςw = pwlωw. We will modify these plays so that whenever a state is reached at multiple different points (possibly across different plays) the same edge is selected each time. We will change the way we count violations of positionality from Proposition 6. This time, given a set of set of plays P ⊆ δω , the violation count of a state v ∈ V is count (P, v ) = 

|{ e ∈ δ | src (e) = v, e = p[i] for some i ∈ N and some p ∈ P }| . In other words, the violation count of v in P is the number of distinct edges across any play in P which are outgoing from 

v. Once count (P, v ) = 1 for all v ∈ V , we can easily construct a positional strategy which generates all the traces in P . We will perform two different operations to lower the violation count of a given set of ultimately periodic plays P :

1. Remove violations along a single play ςw using the method outlined in 6. 

2. Remove violations across multiple plays using totally ordered residuals. We will expand on the second operation. Let us suppose we have first applied operation (1) to remove all violations along each play - so in a given play, for every state v ∈ V , there is a single distinct outgoing edge from v that features in the play. However, the outgoing 

v edge in one play may not be equal to the outgoing v edge in another play. We will first select some state v ∈ V which appears across multiple plays but is not followed by the same edge each time. We will split each play ςw containing v into ςw = ςw, 1ςw, 2 where ςw, 2 begins at the first occurrence of v in the play. Let λw, 1, λ w, 2 be the words generated by ςw, 1 and 

ςw, 2 respectively. Since L has totally ordered residuals, there is some w ∈ W such that for all other w′ ∈ W , RL(λw′,1) ⊆ RL(λw, 1), which means that for each w′, λw′,1λw, 2 ∈ L.Therefore, if we replace each ςw′ with ςw′,1ςw, 2 for this maximal w, each play is still winning. It can also be seen that ςw, 2 only contains a single distinct edge outgoing from v, namely the edge at ςw, 2[0] . Since we did this at the first instance of an outgoing v edge across every play, every edge e with src (e) = v across all plays is now equal to ςw, 2[0] . Additionally, every play is still ultimately periodic. We will call this new set of plays P . This means our violation count for vio (P, v ) = 1 . We may have introduced violations along the plays for some states, in terms of the count used in Proposition 6, but note that further applications of this operation and operation (1) will preserve the fact that every instance of v is followed by the same outgoing edge, since none of these operations add new edges that did not already exist in some play. So, they cannot increase the count vio (P, v ). Therefore, once we repeat this process for each v ∈ V , we are left with a set of winning plays from each w ∈ W where a given state is always followed by the same edge. From this it is simple to construct a positional strategy which generates these plays. 

◀▶ Corollary 11. Given a Wilke algebra S = ( S+, S ω ) recognising a language L ⊆ Σω , we can determine whether L is positional in polynomial time. 

Proof. Suppose F ⊆ Sω is the set and φ : ( A+, A ω ) → (S+, S ω ) the map such that 

φ−1(F ) = L. To check for totally ordered residuals, for each s ∈ S+ we take the set J. Newman and B. Plummer 23:25 

s−1L = {w ∈ Sω |sw ∈ F }. L has totally ordered residuals if {s−1L|s ∈ S+} is totally ordered by inclusion. This can be checked in time O(|S+| · | Sω |). For each of the other conditions, we need to check uvwx ω and u(vwx )ω (and also vwx ω , u(vw )ω ) for each u, v, w, x ∈ S+ , which can be done in time O(|S+|4). ◀▶ Proposition 13. A prefix-independent ω-regular language L is positional iff (uv )ω ∈ L

implies either uω ∈ L or vω ∈ L.

Proof. Prefix-independent languages have only one distinct residual, so the set of residuals is trivially totally ordered. Suppose uvwx ω ∈ L. By prefix-independence, this is the case iff 

xω ∈ L iff uwx ω ∈ L, meeting the first condition for positionality. Similarly, u(vw )ω ∈ L iff 

(vw )ω ∈ L, uv ω ∈ L iff vω ∈ L and uw ω ∈ L iff wω ∈ L. So, all conditions for positionality from Cor. 10 are met when (uv )ω ∈ L implies either uω ∈ L or vω ∈ L. ◀▶ Proposition 16. Suppose a language L can be expressed in the form Σ∗(SR )ω , where 

L(S) ⊆ Σ, and L(R) ⊆ (Σ \ L(S)) ∗ is a subword-closed regular language. Then, L is prefix-independent and positional. 

Proof. Clearly L is prefix-independent. Let us take a word (vw )ω ∈ L. WLOG let us assume 

v = v1sv 2s . . . sv n and w = w1sw 2s . . . sw n. We will show either wω ∈ L or vω ∈ L. Clearly each vi or wi is in R, so this amounts to showing either vnv1 or wnw1 is in R. Suppose both vnv1 and wnw1 are not in R. However, we know vnw1 ∈ R and wnv1 ∈ R, since 

(vw )ω ∈ L. So, w1 ∈ RR(vn), w1 /∈ RR(wn) and v1 /∈ RR(vn), v1 ∈ RR(wn), contradicting our assumption of totally ordered residuals for R. So, at least one of vnv1 or wnw1 is in 

R, meaning either vω or wω is in L as required. If there are no occurences of s in v or no occurences of s in w, we have either vnwv 1 ∈ R or wnvv 1 ∈ R, from which can use the closure under subwords to guarantee that either vω or wω ∈ L respectively. ◀▶ Proposition 17. Suppose L ⊆ Σ∗ is a subword-closed language with anti-dictionary D.

L has totally-ordered residuals iff for every xy, uv ∈ D, there is some d ∈ D such that 

d ≤SU B xv or d ≤SU B uy .

Proof. Suppose L has totally ordered residuals. Then, either RL(x) ⊆ RL(u) or vice versa - let us suppose the former. Since v / ∈ RL(u) then v / ∈ RL(x), so xv / ∈ L. Therefore there must be some d ∈ D such that d ≤SU B xv . The argument is symmetric for the other case. Suppose for every xy, uv ∈ D, there is some d ∈ D such that d ≤ xv or d ≤ uy . Let us look at RL(u) and RL(v) for some arbitrary u, v . Suppose there is some x ∈ RL(u), y / ∈ RL(u)

and x / ∈ RL(v), y ∈ RL(v). So, there must be some p, q ∈ D such that p = p1p2, q = q1q2,and p1 ≤SU B u,p2 ≤SU B y,q1 ≤SU B v,q2 ≤SU B x. We know there is some d ∈ D such that either d ≤SU B p1q2 or d ≤SU B q1p2. However, this means either d ≤SU B ux or d ≤SU B vy ,which contradicts our assumption they were in the language. So, L must have totally ordered residuals. ◀▶ Proposition 18. Every subword-closed language with a single element anti-dictionary has totally-ordered residuals. 

Proof. Suppose L is a subword-closed language with anti-dictionary D = {w}. Let |w| = l.Let us take xy, uv ∈ Σ∗ such that xy = uv = w. Let |x| = i and |u| = j. Suppose i ≤ j.The word uy is equal to w[1 , j ] · w[i + 1 , l ]. Since j ≥ i, this must contain w as a subword, so w ≤SU B uy . The case is symmetric where j ≤ i. Therefore, L meets the condition for totally-ordered residuals. ◀

C V I T 2 0 1 6 23:26 Positional Properties in Temporal Logic 

▶ Proposition 22. If L is a positional ω-regular language, then for each a ∈ Σ, the set of residuals for words ending in a, {RL(ua )|u ∈ Σ∗}, is totally ordered by inclusion. 

Proof. Suppose this is not the case, so x ∈ RL(ua ), y ∈ RL(va ), y / ∈ RL(ua ), x / ∈ RL(va ) for 

u, v, x, y ∈ Σ∗, a ∈ Σ, s.t. u = u0 . . . u n, v = v1 . . . v m for ui, v i ∈ Σ. Then, L is not positional over the following game: 

a

u0

v0 . . . 

. . . 

u1 . . . u n

v1 . . . v n

x

y

◀▶ Proposition 19. If D is the anti-dictionary of a subword-closed language with totally-ordered residuals, then D ∪ { a} for any a ∈ Σ is the anti-dictionary of a subword-closed language with totally-ordered residuals. 

Proof. Take some d ∈ D such that d = d1d2 for d1, d 2 ∈ Σ∗. We also have a = εa = aε ∈

D ∪ { a}. Both d1a and ad 2 have a ∈ D ∪ { a} as a subword, so D ∪ { a} meets the required condition for totally-ordered residuals from Prop 17. ◀▶ Theorem 23. The following are equivalent for an ω-regular language L:

L is non-uniform 1P state-labelled positional. 

L is positional over finite 2P arenas. For each a ∈ Σ, the set {RL(wa )|w ∈ Σ∗} is totally ordered by inclusion, and conditions (1) and (2) hold from Proposition 20. 

Proof sketch. The 1P uniform case follows from the same method as Proposition 8, so we will focus on 2P arenas. The idea will be to represent a strategy in a 2-player game as a collection of infinite trees, where the infinite paths through the trees give us all plays generated by that strategy. A strategy is then winning if all the infinite paths lie within the objective L. The nodes in the tree will correspond to states. A node corresponding to a P1 controlled state will have a single successor, encoding the move chosen by the strategy. A node corresponding to a P2 controlled state will have a successor for every transition from that state. We will show that we can adjust the moves taken at P1 controlled nodes to obtain a tree where for a given P1 state, at every node corresponding to that state we select the same next move. We will first note that condition (1) can be actually be applied to words without a periodic tail, as by the Ramseyan factorization theorem [ 39 ] every word z ∈ Σω admits a factorization z = z1z2 . . . such that for any u ∈ Σ∗, uz 1zω 

> 2

∈ L iff uz ∈ L. We will use this to apply condition (1) to infinite paths through the tree of plays which may not necessarily be ultimately periodic. Suppose we have a state-labelled 2P game (V1, V 2, δ, π ) with a finite-memory strategy 

σ for P1, which is winning from a set of states W ⊆ V . We will assume the strategy is implemented by an automaton with M memory states, and transitions are labelled with states V , so the memory state along a play is determined by the history of states seen so far. We refer to [ 12 ] for the details on implementing strategies with memory structures in this way. Note that each out (σ, w ) forms an infinite tree of winning plays from w. We J. Newman and B. Plummer 23:27 

can think of the subtree as being rooted at w: if w ∈ V1, then this has a single successor 

tgt (σ(w)) . Otherwise, if w ∈ V2, this has a successor for each v ∈ δ(w). Similarly for any node v which was reached via a partial play ς ∈ δ+, if v ∈ V1 then there is a single successor 

σ(ς), otherwise there is a successor for each v′ ∈ δ(v). Each node on the tree is reached with a unique sequence of edges, i.e. a partial play p ∈ δ+, although we can also specify this as the sequence of states src (p[0]) src (p[1]) . . . src (p[|p| − 1]) . We will abuse notation and use p

to contextually refer to either a partial play, the equivalent sequence of states, or the partial trace π(p[0]) π(p[1]) . . . π (p[|p| − 1]) ∈ Σ+ generated by the partial play. We also note there is a correspondence between finite-memory strategies and infinite trees of plays which consist of a finite number of subtrees. Suppose we have a finite-memory strategy with memory states M . The strategy prescribes moves based on the current memory state and the current state of the arena. Given two subtrees of out (σ, w ), if the roots of the subtrees are at both the same memory and arena states, then the subtrees will be identical. This means there are |M | × | V | possible subtrees in out (σ, w ). On the other hand, if we have an infinite tree of (valid) plays with n different subtrees, note that along every play we must see a repeated subtree somewhere before depth n + 1 . Therefore, the root of every distinct subtree is present somewhere before n + 1 in the tree. This means we can take the tree up to depth n as the states of our finite-memory strategy σ′, and for each node in the tree v, for each successor v′ of v, we add a transition pointing to said successor with the label of v′. For the nodes at depth n, for each of their successors v′ in the original tree, we find a point where this subtree is rooted before depth n; we can then add a transition in our finite-strategy automaton which points to the pre-depth n root of this subtree. We can pick all other required transitions arbitrarily. Essentially, we have ‘folded’ our tree of plays into a finite automaton. We then set the strategy such that at a memory state rooted at 

v ∈ V1, we pick out the corresponding successor. It can be seen that out (σ′, w ) will generate our original tree. We will define a process which, over the tree of plays out (σ, q ), for a given state v ∈ V1,strictly reduces the number of distinct subtrees rooted at v. Firstly, we identify along every play, the first point at which v is seen. For each such v, we denote by T the subtree rooted at this node, and we denote by u the path to this subtree from our overall tree. We will pick a subtree of T , call this T ′, rooted at v and in which a different successor from the root is chosen than T . We will show that within T , either we can recursively replace all instances of 

T ′ with T and still be left with tree of winning plays overall, or we can recursively replace all instances of T with T ′ and still be left with a tree of winning plays overall. We have two possible cases; either T ′ contains T as a subtree, or T ′ does not contain T

as a subtree. Let us denote by ΛT ′ the set of traces generated by the tree T ′ and by ΛT the traces of T , and let us denote by X the set of all paths from the root of T to the root of the first instance of T ′ along any path in T . We will first deal with the latter. Let us pick a particular x. We know that ux ΛT ′ ⊆ L. Replacing every instance of T

with T ′ entails showing uΛT ′ ⊆ L, whereas (recursively) replacing every instance of T ′ with 

T entails showing both u(X)nΛT ⊆ L and uX ω ⊆ L. Firstly, we know for any x ∈ X and 

λ ∈ ΛT ′ that uxλ ∈ L. Therefore we will check each of these traces against condition (1). If for any x, we have for all λ, uλ ∈ L, we are done, as uΛT ′ ⊆ L. Otherwise, from (1) we know that for all x, ux ω ∈ L. From totally ordered residuals, we know for any x either 

RL(u) ⊇ RL(ux ) (if the other way around, we would have uΛT ′ ⊆ L), so ux ΛT ⊆ L, and so for any x′, we have uxx ′ΛT ′ ⊆ L. Similarly we have RL(u) ⊇ RL(uxx ′), and it can be seen that we can repeat this procedure for any sequence of paths in X, so uX nΛT ⊆ L and 

uX nΛT ′ ⊆ L. We will now move on to proving the other required part, that we also have 

C V I T 2 0 1 6 23:28 Positional Properties in Temporal Logic 

uX ω ∈ L.For any sequence p ∈ Xn, we have up ΛT ′ ⊆ L, so by condition (1) - since we know we do not have uΛT ′ - we have up ω ∈ L. We will now show that for any t ∈ X∗,p ∈ Xn we have 

utp ω . Since ut ΛT ′ ⊆ L and up ω ∈ L, by totally ordered residuals, either uΛT ′ ⊆ L (which we know to be false) or utp ω ∈ L as required. Now let us take any infinite word z ∈ Xω . Let us take a finite ω-semigroup S = ( S+, S ω )

recognising our language L with a map φ : Σ ∞ → S. By the Ramseyan factorization theorem [ 39 ], the word z admits a factorisation z = z1z2z3 . . . such that φ(z1z2 . . . ) = 

φ(z1)φ(z2) . . . = s · e · e . . . = se ω for some s, e ∈ S+ for idempotent e. Observe that by the previous paragraph, uz 1zω 

> 2

∈ L. Since φ(z1zω 

> 2

) = φ(z1)φ(z2)φ(z2) . . . = se ω = φ(z), then 

φ(uz ) = φ(u)φ(z) = φ(u)φ(z1zω 

> 2

) = φ(uz 1zω 

> 2

). So, it must be that uz 1zω 

> 2

∈ L iff uz ∈ L, so 

uz ∈ L for any z ∈ Xω . Therefore, we have our other required condition that uX ω ⊆ L.Now let us assume both T ′ is a subtree of T , and T ′ is a subtree of T . Let us further denote by Y the set of all paths from the root of T ′ to the first instance of a subtree T

along some path in T ′. Showing we can recursively replace every instance of T with T ′

amounts to showing (both uX nΛT ⊆ L and uX ω ⊆ L), whereas the converse amounts to showing (both uY nΛT ′ ⊆ L and uY ω ⊆ L). Note that along any path p which leads to subtree rooted at T , we can apply above part of the proof to get that either we have 

p(X)nΛT ⊆ L and pX ω ⊆ L, or we have pΛT ′ ⊆ L. Similarly with T and T ′, X and Y

swapped. Let us consider what happens if p(X)nΛT ⊆ L and pX ω ⊆ L: this means in the subtree T rooted at p, we can recursively replace every subtree T ′ with T - we will call this new tree T ′′ . Once we have T ′′ , let us look at the nearest ancestor of T ′′ which is also rooted at v, call this T ′′′ . Another application of the above part of the proof will allow us to either move T ′′ up to T ′′′ , or recursively replace the children of T ′′′ with T ′′ . Further applications would eventually lead to the original subtree T , whereupon we would have our required subtree with either all T s or T ′s recursively exchanged for the other. Therefore, we can assume that for any p leading to a tree rooted at v, p(X)nΛT ⊆ L, and p(Y )nΛT ⊆ L.Recursive applications of this get us that u(X∗Y ∗)∗ΛT ⊆ L and u(X∗Y ∗)∗ΛT ′ ⊆ L, since we can use this to replace a layer of T trees with T ′ trees at any depth, and vice versa. Let us note that (XY )ω ⊆ ΛT and (Y X )ω ⊆ ΛT ′ , so we have u(X∗Y ∗)∗(XY )ω ⊆ L and 

u(X∗Y ∗)∗(Y X )ω ⊆ L. From this, we can show our final required condition that either 

uX ω ⊆ L or uY ω ⊆ L. Suppose this is not the case, so there is a a ∈ Xω and b ∈ Y ω

such that ua / ∈ L and ub / ∈ L. Again, we can find factorisations a = a1a2a3 . . . such that 

φ(a) = φ(a1)φ(a2) . . . = s · e · e . . . = se ω = φ(a1aω 

> 2

) for some s, e ∈ S+ for idempotent e

and b = b1b2b3 . . . such that φ(b) = φ(b1)φ(b2) . . . = s′ · e′ · e′ . . . = s′e′ω = φ(b1bω 

> 2

) for some 

s′, e ′ ∈ S+ for idempotent e′. So, we know ua 1aω 

> 2

/∈ L and ub 1bω 

> 2

/∈ L. However, note that both ua 1(a2b2)ω ∈ u(X∗Y ∗)∗(XY )ω ⊆ L and ub 1(a2b2)ω ∈ u(X∗Y ∗)∗(XY )ω ⊆ L. So, we can apply condition (2) to get either ua 1aω 

> 2

∈ L, which we assumed was not the case, or 

ua 1bω 

> 2

∈ L. Similarly, we are forced to have ub 1aω 

> 2

∈ L. Applying totally ordered residuals gives us either ua 1aω 

> 2

∈ L or ub 1bω 

> 2

∈ L, in either case contradicting our initial assumption. Therefore, we have either uX ω ⊆ L or uY ω ⊆ L as required: if the former, within the tree rooted at path u we can recursively replace all subtrees T ′ with T , if the latter we can recursively replace all subtrees T with T ′.With the above two methods, we can replace all instances of T in a subtree with T ′ or vice versa, for two subtrees T and T ′ rooted at the same node. We repeat this for the T

rooted at the first instance of v along every path. We then apply totally ordered residuals to replace every tree rooted at a first instance of v along a path with the same one. We will call the overall tree at this point T qnew , and the subtree rooted at the first instance of every v, Tv .J. Newman and B. Plummer 23:29 

We first note that T qnew can be implemented by a finite-memory strategy. First we take our original finite memory strategy implementing our previous tree. We create two copies of this, which we will refer to as the upper copy and lower copy . First, we take the product of the lower copy and the automaton MV = ( V, δ V ) where δ(v1, v 2) = v2. The initial memory state is in the upper copy. We set the upper copy such that for any state, transitions between memory states for the label v, m1

> v

→ m2, now transition to the memory state (m2, v ) in the lower copy. Recall that subtrees in the tree of plays corresponded to pairs (m′, v ′) where m′

is a memory state and v′ is a state in the arena. We identify the pars (mT , v ) and (mT ′ , v )

which corresponded to the subtrees T and T ′ respectively. If we replaced all trees T with 

T ′, we replace all transitions into (mT , v ) with transitions into (mT ′ , v ), making the state 

(mT , v ). Otherwise, we do the reverse. The action of a memory state m in the upper copy at a state v′ is the same as before. Note that a memory state (m, v ′) in the lower copy is only reached at a state v′, so we set the action of this at any state to the action of m on v′. It can be seen that from state q, this will generate T qnew . Suppose there were n different memory states that could be previously be reached whilst in state v. In this new memory structure, if we are in a state v we must be in a lower copy state (m, v ), and the memory state m must have previously been reachable in a state v. Additionally, we have made either the memory state (mT , v ) or (mT ′ , v ) unreachable. Therefore, there are at most n − 1 different memory states which can be reached from v. So, within finite applications of this process, we either reach a point where we have distinct subtrees rooted at v but where the same successor is chosen every time, or we only have 1 memory state reachable from v, at which point every subtree rooted at v is identical. We can repeat this for each tree of plays beginning at each state, until we have a collection of trees where in each the state v is followed by the same successor state. We can then identify, across every play in every tree of plays, the first subtree rooted at v and apply totally ordered to residuals to ensure that the same successor state is chosen for v in every play beginning from every state. Once we repeat this for every v ∈ V1, we have a collection of trees in which every P1 state is followed by the same choice of successor state, from which it is simple to construct a positional strategy. 

◀▶ Proposition 24. An ω-regular language L is positional over state-labelled arenas iff it can be played optimally with memory of the previous label in edge-labelled arenas. 

Proof. Suppose we have an L which can be played optimally with memory of the previous colour in edge-labelled games. Take an arbitrary state-labelled game S = ( V1, V 2, δ, π ). Take a memoryful strategy σ in S for P1, with winning states W ⊆ V . Take the edge-labelled game E = ( V1, V 2 ∪ {∗} , δ ′) where δ′ = {(v, π (v′), v ′)|(v, v ′) ∈ δ} ∪ { (∗, π (w), w )|w ∈ W }.Given a strategy σ in S, to obtain a strategy in E we set σ′(∗q1 . . . q n) = σ′(q1 . . . q n) = (qn, π (σ(q1 . . . q n)) , σ (q1 . . . q n)) . It can be seen that if σ in S is winning from each w ∈ W ,then σ′ is winning from ∗ in E. Since L can be played optimally with a memory of the previous colour, we have a ς′ : V ∪ (V × Σ) → V which is winning from ∗ when provided the previous colour seen in the play. We define a positional strategy in our state-labelled arena ς : V → V such that ς(v) = ς′(v, π (v)) . It can be seen that from a w ∈ W , all traces generated by ς are also generated by ς′ from ∗ - since all traces generated by ς′ from ∗ are winning, ς will be winning from all w ∈ W .For the other direction, suppose we have a state-labelled positional L. Take an arbitrary edge-labelled game E = ( V1, V 2, δ ). Let δ1 = {(c, v ′)|(v, c, v ′) ∈ δ, v ′ ∈ V1} and δ2 =

{(c, v ′)|(v, c, v ′) ∈ δ, v ′ ∈ V2}. Let us take the state-labelled game S = ( δ1, δ 2, δ ′, π ) where: 

C V I T 2 0 1 6 23:30 Positional Properties in Temporal Logic 

(( c, v ′), (c′, q ′)) ∈ δ′ iff (v′, c ′, q ′) ∈ δ; and π(( c, v )) = c. Suppose we have a memoryful strategy σ in E which is winning at states W ⊆ V . From this, we can obtain a memoryful strategy ς over S which is winning at, for each w ∈ W the state (c, v ′) where σ(w) = ( w, c, v ′).To do this, first for each (c, v ) we will select, if it exists, a state v(c,v ) which is winning under 

σ and is such that σ(v(c,v )) = ( v(c,v ), c, v ). If this does not exist, we select an arbitrary state 

v(c,v ) with an outgoing edge (v(c,v ), c, v ) Then, we set ς(( c1, v 1) . . . (cn, v n)) = ( cn+1 , v n+1 )

where σ(( v(c1,v 1), c 1, v 1) . . . (vn−1, c n, v n)) = ( vn, c n+1 , v n+1 ). This simply copies the edges chosen in winning plays where the first edge chosen is (w, c, v ′) for some w, so can be seen to winning at any (c, v ′) where either (w′, c, v ′) is chosen as the first edge from a winning play from some w′ ∈ V1, or where (w′, c, v ) ∈ δ for some winning w′ ∈ V2. Since L is state-labelled positional, there will be a positional strategy, which is a function σ′ : Σ × V → Σ × V , with the same winning states. From this we can obtain a function σ′′ : (Σ × V ) ∪ V → δ by, for each c, v such that σ′(c, v ) = ( c′, v ′), setting σ′′ (c, v ) = ( v, c ′, v ′). This will be defined for any 

c, v pair where c is a label on an outgoing edge from v. We will set the action of σ′′ (v) to either: if there is state (c, v ′) in S for which σ′ is winning and such that (v, c, v ′) ∈ δ, then select this, or otherwise, select an arbitrary outgoing edge from v. If we generate a play from 

w ∈ W using σ′′ in E, by providing the previously seen label, it can be seen that this will still be winning. Therefore, whenever L is state-positional, for any memoryful strategy in an edge-labelled game we can find a strategy with memory of the previously seen label that has the same winning states. ◀▶ Proposition 26. Prefix-independent languages form an ∞-variety corresponding to the identity uv = v for u ∈ Σ∗, v ∈ Σω .

Proof. First we will show closure under boolean operations. Suppose x ∈ L1 ∩ L2 for prefix independent L1, L 2; this is the case iff x ∈ L1 and x ∈ L2 iff ux ∈ L1 and ux ∈ L2 iff 

ux ∈ L1 ∩ L2. Similarly for union. For complement, x ∈ L iff x / ∈ L iff ux / ∈ L iff ux ∈ L.For prefix-independent ω−languages, RL(u) = L for any u ∈ Σ∗, so they are closed under taking residuals. Given a map φ : ( A+, A ω ) → (B+, B ω ) and a prefix-independent L ⊆ Bω ,we will show φ−1(L) is prefix-independent. Suppose x ∈ φ−1(L) for some x ∈ Aω . Then, 

φ(x) ∈ L, so for all u ∈ B+, uφ (x) ∈ L. This includes all u ∈ φ(A+), so for all u ∈ A+,

φ(ux ) ∈ L, so ux ∈ φ−1(L). For the other direction, suppose for some u ∈ A+, x ∈ Aω we have ux ∈ φ−1(L), i.e. φ(ux ) ∈ L, so φ(u)φ(x) ∈ L, and by prefix independence, φ(x) ∈ L.So, x ∈ φ−1(L) as required. Suppose an ω−semigroup (S+, S ω ) satisfies the identity uv = v. Take some map φ :(A+, A ω ) → (S+, S ω ), and some F ⊆ Sω . For any u ∈ A+, x ∈ Aω , we have φ(ux ) = 

φ(u)φ(x) = φ(x), so x ∈ φ−1(F ) iff ux ∈ φ−1(F ).Suppose we have a prefix-independent L, and we take the syntactic semigroup. For infinite words x, y ∈ Aω , then x ∼L y iff for all u ∈ A+, ux ∈ L iff uy ∈ L, which by prefix independence means x ∈ L iff y ∈ L. For any uv ∈ Aω , by prefix independence uv ∼L v, so in the syntactic semigroup the identity uv = v holds. ◀▶ Proposition 27. If V is an ∞-variety consisting entirely of prefix-independent positional languages, then the only ω-languages it contains are ∅ and Σω .

Proof. It is well known that ∞− varieties of languages correspond to varieties of ω−semigroups. In other words, given an ∞− variety V there is a variety of ω-semigroups V such that for any V ∈ V and φ : Σ + → V , and any F ⊆ V , we can find the language φ−1(F ) in V.The languages {∅ , Σ, Σω , Σ∞} are all prefix-independent and positional, and form an 

∞-variety. This can be generated by the trivial variety consisting of ω−semigroup ({⋆}, {⋆}).J. Newman and B. Plummer 23:31 

Suppose we have an ∞− variety consisting entirely of prefix-independent positional languages. We need that every language recognised by the corresponding variety of ω-semigroups is positional and prefix-independent. A language L is prefix independent when 

v ∈ L iff uv ∈ L. If we have an ω-semigroup S = ( S+, S ω ) and a set F ⊆ S recognising a prefix-independent language L, then we require that for all u ∈ S+, v ∈ Sω , uv ω ∈ F iff 

vω ∈ F . Since we could have any F ⊆ Sω , including the set {uv ω }, we require that the S

satisfies the equation uv ω = vω . For positionality, we know we require (uv )ω ∈ L implies either uω ∈ L or vω ∈ L, so we need that in S for each u, v ∈ S+ either (uv )ω = uω or 

(uv )ω = vω .Suppose our variety contains an ω-semigroup S where uω̸ = vω for some u, v ∈ S+. Every element in Sω is equal to tω for some t ∈ S+, so this is required to have more than one element in Sω and recognise more ω-languages than ∅ and Σω . Varieties are closed under finite products, so let us look at the product S × S, and assume it recognises only prefix-independent and positional languages. In S×S, (( u, v )·(v, u )) ω either equals (u, v )ω = ( uω , v ω )

or (v, u )ω = ( vω , u ω ) by positionality. (( u, v ) · (v, u )) ω = ( uv, vu )ω = (( uv )ω , (vu )ω ) by the definition of multiplication and ω on the product. For any s, t ∈ S+, (st )ω = s(ts )ω = ( ts )ω ,so (( uv )ω , (vu )ω ) = ( x, x ) for some x ∈ Sω . However, we already know (( u, v ) · (v, u )) ω

equals either (uω , v ω ) or (vω , u ω ) where uω̸ = vω , giving us a contradiction. Therefore this product does not recognise only positional and prefix-independent languages. Any variety of languages recognising more ω−languages than ∅ and Σω will have at least one ω−semigroup in the corresponding variety where uω̸ = vω for some u, v ∈ S+. Varieties of ω−semigroups are closed under products, so a variety of languages that contains only prefix-independent and positional languages must only recognise the ω-languages ∅ and Σω . ◀▶ Corollary 28. An ∞-variety containing only positional languages must not contain a (non-trivial) prefix-independent language. 

Proof. Suppose a variety V containing only positional languages contained a prefix-independent language L. We know by Proposition 26 that prefix-independent languages form a variety, so the variety generated by {L} would be a subvariety of this, and would be a subvariety of 

V so would contain only positional languages. Therefore, it would be a variety consisting only of prefix-independent and positional languages, which we know to be impossible by Proposition 27. ◀▶ Proposition 29. The class of languages containing, for each alphabet Σ, the languages of the form F G (A1) ∪ . . . ∪ F G (An) where Ai ⊆ Σ form a positive ∞-variety. 

Proof. Clearly this is closed under finite union by definition. Suppose we have a finite intersection of languages of the form ⋂ 

> i∈I

F G (Ai); we will show this can be written as 

F G (B) for some B ⊆ Σ. Any word w ∈ ⋂ 

> i∈I

F G (Ai) has a finite index i beyond which all characters are in ⋂ 

> i∈I

Ai, so w ∈ F G (⋂ 

> i∈I

Ai). If w ∈ F G (⋂ 

> i∈I

Ai), then clearly it is in each F G (Ai) and so w ∈ ⋂ 

> i∈I

F G (Ai). Given a finite intersection of languages of the form 

F G (A1) ∪ . . . ∪ F G (An), we can distribute the intersection through the union and apply the previous step to obtain a language of the form F G (B1) ∪ . . . ∪ F G (Bm). These languages are prefix independent, so are trivially closed under taking residuals. Suppose we have a language 

L ⊆ Bω of this form, and a map φ : A∞ → B∞. We will show φ−1(L) is also of this form. Given a set S ⊆ Σ+ we denote by col (S) the smallest set C ⊆ Σ such that S ⊆ C+. It can be seen that φ−1(F G (A1) ∨ . . . ∨ F G (An)) = F G (col (φ−1(A+1 )) ∨ . . . ∨ col (φ−1(A+ 

> n

))) . For the left-to-right inclusion, we have some w ∈ Aω such that at some point j, at all k ≥ j, φ([ k]) 

only contains labels in some Ai, so φ(w[k]) ∈ A+ 

> i

. So, w ∈ F G (col (φ−1(A+ 

> i

))) . For the other 

C V I T 2 0 1 6 23:32 Positional Properties in Temporal Logic 

direction, we have some w ∈ Aω such that at some point j, at all k ≥ j, w[k] ∈ col (φ−1(A+ 

> i

)) .So, φ(w[k]) ∈ A+ 

> i

, therefore φ(w) ∈ F G (A1) ∨ . . . ∨ F G (An) as required. ◀▶ Proposition 31. If we add any of the following composite LTL modalities to the path formula of ATL , the semantics remains positional: GF φ ∧ F Gψ , G(φU ψ ), GF φ ∧ F Gψ ∧ Gϕ ,and G(φ ∨ Xφ ).

Proof. (GF p ∧ F Gq )

It can be seen that GF p ∧ F Gq is prefix-independent. Let us take trace a of the form 

u(vw )ω satisfying GF p ∧ F Gq . We know both v and w must contain only labels containing 

q, else u(vw )ω would not satisfy F Gq . Similarly, either v or w must contain p. If v contains 

p, then uv ω satisfies the property, otherwise uw ω satisfies the property. Therefore, by Proposition 13, GF p ∧ F Gq is positional (over edge and state-labelled games). (G(pU q ))It can be seen the language has only 2 distinct sets of residuals: ∅ and G(pU q ). At any point on a trace satisying G(pU q ), either p or q is in the current label, and q is seen within a finite number of steps. Take a satisfying trace of the form uvwx ω . The trace uwx ω will satisfy G(pU q ), as there must be a q within finite steps of the start of wx ω . Take a satisfying trace of the form u(vx )ω . Either v or x contains a label with q - if v, then uv ω satisfies the property, otherwise ux ω satisfies the property. (GF p ∧ F Gq ∧ Gr )It can be seen the language has only 2 distinct sets of residuals: ∅ and GF p ∧ F Gq ∧ Gr .At any point on a trace satisfying GF p ∧ F Gq ∧ Gr , r is in the current label, p is seen within a finite number of steps, and q is seen in every label within a finite number of steps. Take a satisfying trace of the form uvwx ω : the trace uwx ω must satisfy GF p ∧ F Gq ∧ Gr , as there must be a p within finite steps of the start of wx ω , there is still a finite point after which q

is seen in every label, and all positions are still labelled with r. Take a satisfying trace of the form u(vx )ω . Either v or x contains a label with p - if v, then uv ω satisfies the property, otherwise ux ω satisfies the property. 

(p ∨ Xp ) Let L = G(p ∨ Xp ). Suppose we have uvwx ω ∈ L, with uwx ω /∈ L. Then, 

u must end in a set X not containing p and w must begin in a set Y not containing p.Therefore, v must begin and end with sets containing p and have no substrings longer than 1 consisting of sets not containing p, or uvwx ω would not have been in the language. So, 

uv ω ∈ L. Similar for words of the form u(vwx )ω . There are 3 different residuals. For words 

w ∈ Σ∗ which have a run of two or more sets not containing p, RL(w) = ∅. If this is not the case, then if w is the empty word or ends in a set containing p then RL(w) = L. Otherwise if w ends in a set not containing p then RL(w) = p ∧ XL . Since ∅ ⊆ p ∧ XL ⊆ L, then the residuals are totally ordered. Therefore, L is positional. ◀▶ Proposition 32. ATL + GF ∧ F G ∧ G and ATL + GU are mutually expressive. 

Proof sketch. We prove the claim in the one-agent case, the claim for full ATL can be proven is an analogous way, generalising from paths to strategies. We have the following logical equivalence 

E(GF ψ ∧ F Gφ ∧ Gϕ ) ≡ E(ϕU (E(G(( φ ∧ ϕ)U (ψ ∧ φ ∧ ϕ))) 

(⇒) Assume we have a model M and a state x which satisfies the left formula. This means that there is a trace λ starting at x which satisfies GF ψ , F Gφ and Gϕ . We show that 

λ also satisfies the right formula. From the semantics of F Gφ , there is an n ∈ N such that 

λ[n + i] ⊨ φ for all i ∈ N. It thus suffices to show λ[n] ⊨ E(G(( ϕ ∧ φ)U (ψ ∧ φ ∧ ϕ))) . We J. Newman and B. Plummer 23:33 

choose λ[n.. ] as our witnessing trace, so are left to verify λ[n.. ] ⊩ G(( ϕ ∧ φ)U (ψ ∧ φ ∧ ϕ)) , to do so we fix an arbitrary i ∈ N and check λ[n + i.. ] ⊩ (ϕ ∧ φ)U (ψ ∧ φ ∧ ϕ). From λ satisfying 

GF ψ , there will exist some i′ ∈ N with λ[n + i + i′] ⊨ ψ, we already know that every point along λ satisfies ϕ and all points after n satisfy φ, so are done. (⇐) Assume we have a model M and a state x which satisfies the right formula. There is a trace λ starting at x with some n s.t. λ[0 ..n −1] ⊩ ϕ and with λ[n] ⊨ EG (( φ∧ϕ)U (ψ ∧φ∧ϕ)) .Hence we have a trace λ′ starting at λ[n] and, for all i ∈ N, there exists some i′ ∈ N

with λ′[i..i + i′′ ] ⊨ φ ∧ ϕ for all i′′ < i ′ and λ[i + i′] ⊨ ψ ∧ φ ∧ ϕ. We can see that 

λ[0 ..n − 1] · λ′ ⊩ GF ψ ∧ F Gφ ∧ Gϕ holds from the previous observations, so the model M

satisfies the left formula at x.Furthermore, we can express GU with GF ∧ F G ∧ G:

E(GψU φ ) ≡ E(GF φ ∧ F G ⊤ ∧ G(ψ ∨ φ)) 

(⇒) Assume we have a model M and a state x which satisfies the left formula. This means that there is a trace λ starting at x which for λ[i.. ] for all i ≥ 0, satisfies ψU φ . We show that λ also satisfies the right formula. At any i, there must be a finite point j ≥ i such that λ[i.. ] ⊩ φ, so GF φ must be satisfied. F G ⊤ is trivially satisfied. At all i, λ[i] ⊩ ψU φ ,which means λ[i] ⊩ φ ∨ (ψ ∧ X(ψU φ )) . Since at all λ[i] either ψ or φ holds, then G(ψ ∨ φ)

is satisfied. Therefore, x ⊨ E(GF φ ∧ F G ⊤ ∧ G(ψ ∨ φ)) .(⇐) Assume we have a model M and a state x which satisfies the right formula. There is a trace λ starting at x s.t. λ ⊩ GF φ ∧ F G ⊤ ∧ G(ψ ∨ φ). We must show that for each i ≥ 0,

λ[i.. ] ⊩ ψU φ . This means that for some j ≥ i, λ[j.. ] ⊩ φ and for all i ≤ k < j , λ[k.. ] ⊩ ψ.Let us take the smallest j ≥ i such that λ[j.. ] ⊩ φ: we know this must exist as λ ⊩ GF φ .We therefore know for all i ≤ k < j that λ[k.. ] ⊮ φ, but also that λ ⊩ G(ψ ∨ φ), so it must be that for each k, λ[k.. ] ⊩ ψ. So, each λ[i.. ] satisfies ψU φ and therefore λ satisfies GψU φ 

as required. ◀▶ Lemma 36. Let A be a set of (possibly composite) LTL modalites, and φ be an LTL formula. Suppose we have two families of rooted transition systems {M n}n∈N and {N n}n∈N, for which 

Mn ⊨ ∃φ and Nn ⊭ ∃φ for all n, and where Mn and Nn cannot be distinguished by any 

CT L + A formula of modal depth less than n. This is enough to show that ⟨i⟩φ is not expressible in ATL + A, for some agent i ∈ Ag .

Proof sketch. Given an agent i ∈ Ag , we define a construction (−)AT L i which transforms a rooted transition system into a rooted concurrent game structure. Given a rooted transition system M, MAT L i will have the same set of states X and assign the same atomic propositions to them. For each state x ∈ X, the set of actions available to agent j will be {∗} for i̸ = j.The set of actions available to agent i will be one-to-one correspondence with the successors at x in M. The transition function of the concurrent game structure will assign each of tuple 

(x, (a, ∗, . . . , ∗)) to a different successor in M at x. It is routine to prove the following fact about this construction: 

MAT L i ⊩ ⟨C⟩ψ ⇐⇒ 

{M ⊩ ∃ψ if i ∈ C

M ⊩ ∀ψ if i̸ ∈ C (1) We now prove the statement of the lemma. By [ 21 , Lemma 10.3.2], it suffices to show that 

(Mn)AT L i ⊨ ⟨i⟩φ and (Nn)AT L i ⊭ ⟨i⟩φ (which easily follows as we have MAT L i ⊨ ⟨i⟩φ ⇐⇒ Mi ⊩ ∃φ), and that (Mn)AT L i ⊨ ψ ⇐⇒ (Nn)AT L i ⊨ ψ for all AT L + A formulas ψ which are of modal depth less than n. We can do induction on the structure of ψ. The semantics 

C V I T 2 0 1 6 23:34 Positional Properties in Temporal Logic 

α1

β1 γ1

N1 :

a1

b1 c1

M1 :

αi+1 

βi+1 γi+1 

Ni

Ni+1 :

ai+1 

bi+1 ci+1 

Ni

Mi+1 :

⊨ a ∧ b

⊨ ¬a ∧ ¬ b

⊨ ¬a ∧ b 

> Figure 1 Recreation of Figure 2.2 from [32]

of atomic propositions and path formula are left unchanged by (−)AT L i , the only non-trivial case is ⟨C⟩ψ, this follows easily once we have established Equation (1). 

◀▶ Proposition 38. ⟨i⟩(GF p ∧ F Gq ) is not expressible in EATL .

Proof. We employ Lemma 36, and find two classes of rooted transition systems which are indistinguishable by any ECT L formula, but for which E(GF φ ∧ F Gψ ) is a separator. This follows from the proof of Lemma 2.8.4 in [ 32 ], which defines two classes of models 

(Mi)i∈N, (Ni)i∈N (Figure 1) that are indistinguishable by any ECTL formulae but for which 

E(GF p ∧ Gq ) is a separator. However, it can be seen that Mi, a i ⊨ E(GF a ∧ F Gb ) and 

Ni, α i ⊭ E(GF a ∧ F Gb ), so E(GF a ∧ F Gb ) is also not expressible in ECTL. 

◀▶ Proposition 39. ⟨i⟩(GpU q ) is not expressible in ATL + GF ∧ F G .

Proof. We will show the corresponding statement for CTL, which is sufficient by Lemma 36. We will use the model in Figure 2, which we will refer to as M. This model is defined such that at any state s′

> i

, the formula EG (pU q ) holds, but at any state si, the same formula does not hold. Therefore, to prove the proposition it is sufficient to show that on this model, for all n ∈ N and φ ∈ ECT L + E(GF ψ ∧ F Gφ ) such that |φ| ≤ n, it is the case that sn ⊨ φ iff 

s′ 

> n

⊨ φ. We will assume states have labels in 2{p,q }.Firstly, we will explain how M is defined. The formula p ∧ ¬ q holds at all si and s′

> i

.The formula ¬p ∧ ¬ q holds at all states l. The state s0 has a single transition leading to itself. All other si and s′ 

> i

are connected through sequences of states. Each σi represents a set of possible paths from si to itself. A path ς is in σi iff it passes through a sequence of states of length ≤ i, and is such that ς ⊭ pU q . For example, s3 will be connected to itself through a sequence of transitions between states s3 → ς1 → ς2 → ς3 → s3 such that for each 

ςi, ςi ⊨ p ∧ ¬ q. A path ς is in wi iff it passes through a sequence of states of length ≤ i, and is such that ς ⊨ pU q . For example, w2 contains transitions through states s2 → ς1 → ς2 → s1.Each σ′ 

> i

contains all Σ1≤j≤i(2 {p,q })j paths of length ≤ i. Note that each si and each s′ 

> i

is connected to si−1 via wi paths. The idea is that CT L +E(GF ψ ∧F Gφ ) cannot distinguish E(F G (ψU φ )) from EG (ψU φ ).J. Newman and B. Plummer 23:35 

s0s1s2

s′

> 1

s′

> 2

ll

· · · 

· · · σ′

> 1

σ′

> 2

σ1σ2

w2 w1          

> Figure 2 Model separating ECT L +E(GφU ψ )and ECT L +E(GF ψ ∧F Gφ )

Note that for i > 0, for each si and s′

> i

, that s′ 

> i

⊨ ∃G(pU q ) (by taking paths in σi infinitely often) but si ⊭ ∃G(pU q ), since from an si, to realise pU q infinitely often we much reach a state s′ 

> i

which requires going through some l in which ¬p ∧ ¬ q holds, breaking the possibility of G(pU q ).We can prove inductively that for any CT L + GF ∧ F G formula φ of size |φ| = n, we have sn1 ⊨ φ iff s′ 

> n2

⊨ φ for any n1, n 2 ≥ n. Additionally, we will show for a path ς′ ∈ σ′

> n

, if 

ς′ ⊭ pU q then there is a path of the same length ς ∈ σn such that for each 0 ≤ i ≤ | ς|, ςi ⊨ φ

iff ς′ 

> i

⊨ φ, and if ς′ ⊨ pU q then there is a path of the same length ρ ∈ wn such that for each 

0 ≤ i ≤ | ρ|, ρi ⊨ φ iff ς′ 

> i

⊨ φ. It should be noted that every trace available at a state si is also available at s′

> i

, and for every trace available at s′

> i

, there is a trace from si with this as a suffix. This means for formulae of the form Eφ , we already have one direction, and where φ

is prefix-independent (e.g. E(GF ψ 1 ∧ F Gψ 2)), we have both directions. For |φ| = 1 , both si

and s′ 

> i

have the same propositional labellings. Similarly for any path ς′ ∈ σ′

> i

, if ς′ ⊨ pU q we can find a path with the same propositional labelling at each state in wi, otherwise we can find a corresponding path in σi.Most of the inductive cases are routine and laborious, so we will just show s′ 

> i

⊨ E(ψ1U ψ 2)

implies si ⊨ E(ψ1U ψ 2) under the IH. Suppose this holds at some s′

> i

. Then, there is some infinite path λ from s′ 

> i

such that at some j, λ[j] ⊨ ψ2 and for all k < j , λ[k] ⊨ ψ1. Suppose 

ψ2 is realised after travelling through a path wi; then, this can also be realised from si by taking the suffix of the path from this point. So, suppose ψ2 is realised along some path 

ς′ ∈ σ′

> i

. If this is a path such that ς′ ⊭ pU q , then by IH there is a path ς ∈ σi which realises 

ψ2, and in which ψ1 holds up until that point. Otherwise, there is a path ρ ∈ wi which realises ψ2, and in which ψ1 holds up until that point. Both of these paths are available from 

si, so si ⊨ E(ψ1U ψ 2) iff s′ 

> i

⊨ E(ψ1U ψ 2).

◀▶ Proposition 40. ⟨i⟩(GF p ∧ GF q ) is not expressible in ATL + GU .

Proof. This follows from the proof of Theorem 4.3 in [ 23 ], which defines two classes of models 

(Mi)i∈N, (Ni)i∈N (Figure 3) that are indistinguishable by any ECTL formula but separated by the ECTL + formula E(GF ψ ∧ GF φ ). We need to show an extra inductive step, that 

Ni, α i ⊨ E(GψU φ ) iff Mi, a i ⊨ E(GψU φ ) assuming the same is true of φ and ψ. Suppose 

Ni, α i ⊨ E(GψU φ ); then there is some state αj or βj (call this σ) for j < i s.t. Ni, σ ⊨ φ,for which every state σ′ between αi and σ is s.t. Ni, σ ′ ⊨ ψ ∨ φ. For the analogous states to 

σ, σ ′ in Mi (call these s and s′), by IH Mi, s ⊨ φ and for each s′, Mi, s ′ ⊨ ψ. So, the path 

aibiai−1 . . . s ω ⊨ G(ψU φ ) - this path exists from ai in Mi, so Mi, a i ⊨ E(GψU φ ) as required. The other direction can be argued symmetrically. ◀

C V I T 2 0 1 6 23:36 Positional Properties in Temporal Logic 

α1

β1

N1 :

a1

b1

M1 :

αi+1 

βi+1 

Mi

Ni+1 :

ai+1 

bi+1 

Mi

Mi+1 :

⊨ p ∧ ¬ q

⊨ ¬p ∧ q

Figure 3 Recreation from [23]