Title: DreamAvoid: Critical-Phase Test-Time Dreaming to Avoid Failures in VLA Policies

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.11750v1

Published Time: Wed, 13 May 2026 00:54:24 GMT

Number of Pages: 19

Markdown Content:
# DREAM AVOID : Critical-Phase Test-Time Dreaming to Avoid Failures in VLA Policies 

Xianzhe Fan 1 Yuxiang Lu 1 Shenyuan Gao 2 Xiaoyang Wu 1

Ruihua Han 1 Manling Li 3 Hengshuang Zhao 1

> 1

HKU 2HKUST 3Northwestern University Value 1 

> VLA
> Critical Phase!
> Value k
> Value n
> Critical Phase Triggered
> Autonomously Learn from Success, Boundary Cases
> & Failure
> Success
> Boundary
> Failure
> (b) Autonomous Boundary Learning (Deploy and Update DreamAvoid) ... ...
> (a) Critical-Phase Test-Time Dreaming ... ...
> Best Action
> Irrecoverable
> Failure!
> Critical Phase

DreamAvoid     

> STEP 1. Dream Trigger STEP 2. Action Proposer STEP 3. Dream Evaluator
> Actions
> Success!
> Dreams
> Safe Zone Failure Zone
> Base VLA Policy SDE Sampling
> Explores Trickier
> Boundaries
> Success
> Boundary Case
> Failure

Figure 1: We propose D REAM AVOID , (a) a critical-phase test-time dreaming framework that enables the VLA to anticipate and avoid failure. This framework consists of a Dream Trigger, an Action Proposer, and a Dream Evaluator. (b) We also introduce an autonomous boundary learning paradigm to equip the world model-based Dream Evaluator with failure awareness. 

## Abstract 

Vision-Language-Action (VLA) models are often brittle in fine-grained manipula-tion, where minor action errors during the critical phases can rapidly escalate into irrecoverable failures. Since existing VLA models rely predominantly on success-ful demonstrations for training, they lack an explicit awareness of failure during these critical phases. To address this, we propose D REAM AVOID , a critical-phase test-time dreaming framework that enables VLA models to anticipate and avoid failures. We also introduce an autonomous boundary learning paradigm to refine the systemŌĆÖs understanding of the subtle boundary between success and failure. Specifically, we (1) utilize a Dream Trigger to determine whether the execution has entered a critical phase, (2) sample multiple candidate action chunks from the VLA via an Action Proposer, and (3) employ a Dream Evaluator, jointly trained on mixed data (success, failure, and boundary cases), to ŌĆ£dreamŌĆØ the short-horizon futures corresponding to the candidate actions, evaluate their values, and select the optimal action. We conduct extensive evaluations on real-world manipulation tasks and simulation benchmarks. The results demonstrate that D REAM AVOID can effectively avoid failures, thereby improving the overall task success rate. Our code is available at https://github.com/XianzheFan/DreamAvoid. 

Preprint. 

> arXiv:2605.11750v1 [cs.RO] 12 May 2026

## 1 Introduction 

Vision-Language-Action (VLA) models provide a promising framework for general-purpose robotic manipulation by directly mapping multimodal observations and language instructions into the action space [ 1ŌĆō3 ]. However, they remain fragile in fine-grained manipulation scenarios. In tasks such as insertion, precise alignment, and contact-sensitive placement, a small local action error can rapidly escalate into an irrecoverable failure [ 4ŌĆō 6]. In many cases, the policy does not perform poorly over the entire trajectory; rather, failures are often triggered by brief yet low-tolerance critical phases 

[7 ]. How can we equip VLAs with stronger consequence-awareness during these critical phases? In human cognition, complex physical tasks are often balanced between fast, intuitive execution and slow, deliberate foresight. When threading a needle or plugging in a cord, we do not consciously plan every minute movement; we rely on intuitive motor priors. However, at critical moments, we briefly pause and simulate in our minds, ŌĆ£dreamingŌĆØ of the physical consequences our actions are about to bring, to avoid making mistakes. Inspired by this, introducing additional computation during the test time to endow VLAs with a ŌĆ£dreamingŌĆØ capability emerges as a natural choice. Powerful large-scale pre-trained world models [ 8]can accurately capture complex environmental dynamics and generate high-fidelity future simulations based on candidate actions. Can we leverage this capability to achieve better consequence-awareness for robots through dreaming at test-time? We conducted a pilot study on a charger plugging task, comparing two test-time compute paradigms: (1) Direct Semantic Evaluation, which uses a VLM to predict success or failure by receiving past and current visual observations and future numerical action sequences; and (2) Explicit Spatiotemporal Dreaming, which uses a large-scale pre-trained action-conditioned world model to explicitly forward-render actions into future visual frames, which are then evaluated by the same VLM. The results showed that when faced with abstract numerical inputs, the VLM tends towards a conservative ŌĆ£almost certain to failŌĆØ prediction pattern, whereas its accuracy improves significantly when evaluating the visual simulations provided by the world model. This contrast reveals a key insight: for fine-grained manipulation, relying solely on implicit numerical reasoning cannot bridge the gap between abstract actions and physical consequences. Therefore, rendering actions into high-fidelity future frames for explicit test-time dreaming is highly beneficial. Following the idea of introducing extra computation at test-time, several studies have proposed their own solutions. For instance, RoboMonkey utilizes a VLM as an online verifier to score and filter candidate actions [ 9]. Some works leverage action-conditioned models for always-on online search and reranking [ 10 ŌĆō 12 ]. On the other hand, some research achieves dynamic scaling of test-time compute through implicit iterative reasoning within a continuous latent space [ 13 ]. However, implementing test-time computation in robotic manipulation tasks still faces two major challenges. First, always-on inference is prohibitively expensive [ 14 ]; executing heavy rollouts at every time step introduces severe latency [ 12 , 13 ]. Second, existing VLAs typically rely on successful trajectories for training [ 1]. This results in policies that learn to imitate success but lack explicit supervision regarding failure boundaries [ 3 , 15 ]. This deficiency is particularly prominent during critical phases, where the robot needs to distinguish between subtle action differences that carry significant consequences. To address these challenges, we propose D REAM AVOID , a critical-phase test-time dreaming frame-work designed to enhance the ability of VLAs to avoid failures (Figure 1). We also introduce an autonomous boundary learning paradigm. Specifically, (1) D REAM AVOID proposes a selective inter-vention mechanism. During routine execution, the robot follows the base policy. When a lightweight Dream Trigger detects an impending critical phase, the system invokes an Action Proposer to sample multiple diverse candidate action chunks. Subsequently, a world-model-based Dream Evaluator engages in short-horizon dreaming to predict their future visual evolution and values, selecting the optimal action. (2) D REAM AVOID proposes an autonomous boundary learning paradigm, introducing failure and boundary data from which the world model can benefit. For the dreams to truly serve a preventive purpose, the world model must possess the ability to have ŌĆ£nightmares.ŌĆØ If trained solely on success data, the world model would generate optimistic hallucinations due to a lack of negative boundary constraints. By deploying D REAM AVOID to explore and collect success, failure, and boundary data, we teach the world model the boundary between success and failure. We evaluate D REAM AVOID across multiple real-world tasks that require precise alignment, stable contact, and effective failure avoidance. Additionally, we conduct simulation benchmarking on LIBERO [ 16 ] and SimplerEnv [ 17 ]. The experimental results demonstrate that D REAM AVOID 

consistently improves task success rates compared to base VLA policies. These findings indicate that 2test-time compute does not need to be always-on; as long as it is invoked during critical phases, world model-based test-time dreaming can implement corrections before failures actually occur, thereby enhancing the reliability of VLAs. The contributions of our paper are summarized as follows: (1) We emphasize the focus on critical phases and propose D REAM AVOID , a critical-phase test-time dreaming framework that enables VLAs to foresee and avoid failures in advance. This plug-and-play framework consists of a Dream Trigger, an Action Proposer, and a Dream Evaluator. (2) We propose an autonomous boundary learning paradigm that endows the world model with failure awareness by introducing failure and boundary data. (3) We demonstrate the advantages of explicit spatiotemporal dreaming in failure prediction through a pilot study. We conduct extensive evaluations on real-world manipulation tasks and simulation benchmarks. The results show that D REAM AVOID can effectively intervene before minor execution errors deteriorate into irrecoverable failures, improving overall task success rates. 

## 2 Related Work 

Brittle VLA Fine-Grained Manipulation. VLA models combine large-scale vision-language pretraining with robotic action generation, substantially improving robotsŌĆÖ semantic understanding and cross-task generalization abilities [ 1ŌĆō 3]. However, recent studies suggest that the bottleneck of VLA models often lies not in insufficient global semantic understanding, but in local decision errors at a few highly sensitive moments [ 4]. As a result, VLA models remain brittle in tasks that require fine-grained alignment, contact control, and obstacle avoidance [ 5, 6]. Building on this observation, this paper treats failures in fine-grained manipulation as a temporally localized critical phase problem. 

Test-Time Compute. To enhance deployment robustness, existing works have begun introducing additional computation into the testing phase. The differences between our method and existing test-time compute mainly lie in two aspects. (1) In terms of trigger timing, existing works tend to favor always-on computation [ 10 , 13 , 18 ŌĆō20 ]. TT-VLA [ 18 ] and EVOLVE-VLA [ 19 ] utilize dense progress rewards for constant online policy adaptation during inference. RD-VLA achieves adaptive computation depth through latent recurrent inference [ 13 ]. In contrast, our method D REAM AVOID 

directly executes the base VLA policy most of the time, triggering additional computation only when the Dream Trigger predicts entry into a temporally sparse yet consequence-sensitive critical phase. (2) In terms of evaluation methods, most Verifier or MPC works predominantly rely on current-state scoring or pixel-level goal alignment [ 9, 11 ]. Visual MPC compares candidate futures based on action-conditioned video prediction, but its scoring criterion is the probability of designated pixels reaching predefined target positions [ 11 ]. RoboMonkey investigates VLA test-time scaling by Gaussian perturbation sampling and selecting from candidate actions using a VLM-based verifier [9 ]. GPC combines Diffusion Policy [ 21 ] with a world model to evaluate candidate actions during deployment, but it does not leverage the rich physical priors embedded in large-scale pre-trained world models [ 10 ]. In comparison, we utilize the high-fidelity future simulation capability of large-scale pre-trained world models. Instead of scoring candidate actions solely based on the current state or generic verifier signals, we explicitly compare the future consequences of different action chunks through failure-aware short-horizon dreaming before performing ranking and selection. 

## 3 Pilot Study: Do We Need Dreaming to Avoid Failure in Critical Phases? 

Table 1: Pilot study on failure prediction for fine-grained manipulation (Charger Plugging).                

> Paradigm Action Representation Evaluator Accuracy (%) Precision (fail) (%) Recall (fail) (%) Direct Semantic Evaluation Textified Action Sequence Gemini 3.1 Pro 57.5 56.4 100.0 Explicit Spatiotemporal Dreaming DreamDojo-Generated Video Gemini 3.1 Pro 80.0 88.9 72.7

We first explore the paradigm of predicting fine-grained manipulation failures at test time. Given the strong semantic reasoning capabilities of VLMs, an intuitive baseline is to directly use them as consequence predictors during test time. We conducted a pilot study on the Charger Plugging task, which is highly sensitive to minor deviations. We constructed a test set containing 40 data episodes (18 successes and 22 failures), which were collected by rolling out a base policy ŽĆ0.5

[ 2] trained on 100 human teleoperation demonstrations in the real world. To accurately evaluate 3the modelŌĆÖs reasoning ability during the critical phase, human annotators manually located a key interaction frame tcrit within each test trajectory. This moment is defined as a frame within the 1-2 s immediately preceding the end-effectorŌĆÖs decisive physical contact with the target object (e.g., just before the plug aligns with the socket). At each tcrit , we extract the current frame ot and a historical observation sequence. The action input is the downsampled future action chunk ut. We compare two test-time failure prediction paradigms: (1) Direct Semantic Evaluation: We input the visual observation sequence containing the historical and current frames, along with the textified action sequence and its semantic description, into Gemini 3.1 Pro [ 22 ]. We use few-shot prompting [ 23 ]for it to predict end-to-end whether executing ut will result in a task failure (such as a collision or misalignment). (2) Explicit Spatiotemporal Dreaming: We use DreamDojo [ 8], an action-conditioned, large-scale pre-trained world model, to forward-render ut into future video frames, which are then evaluated by Gemini 3.1 Pro acting as a visual evaluator. Details are provided in Appendix B. The experimental results reveal the differences in prediction reliability between the two paradigms (Table 1). The accuracy of the Direct Semantic Evaluation paradigm is only 57.5%. Analysis shows that when faced with abstract numerical inputs, the VLM tends toward a conservative ŌĆ£almost always predict failureŌĆØ pattern: it successfully identified all 22 failure samples, but also misclassified 17 successful samples as failures. Although the VLM can understand the semantic goal of ŌĆ£Plug the charger into the socket,ŌĆØ it is almost entirely unable to establish an effective connection between the raw numerical action chunk and its actual physical consequences. In fine-grained manipulation, even a tiny deviation in the action trajectory can lead to catastrophic collisions. However, these minuscule numerical differences are indistinguishable to the VLM, rendering it unable to accurately predict the physical evolution of the trajectory. Conversely, Explicit Spatiotemporal Dreaming demonstrated stronger predictive capabilities, achieving an accuracy of 80.0%. Although slightly optimistic (missing 6 failures), it drastically suppressed false alarms (misclassified success cases dropped from 17 to 2). By explicitly simulating numerical actions forward into visual futures, the world model serves as a critical spatiotemporal bridge. It translates abstract numerical errors into explicit visual deviations, for example, directly dreaming of the plug hitting the edge of the socket or the tabletop. Subsequently, Gemini 3.1 Pro can easily detect this visual anomaly from the generated high-fidelity frames. This pilot study demonstrates that explicit spatiotemporal dreaming is important for avoiding failure in critical phases. 

## 4 DREAM AVOID 

Based on the insights from the pilot study (┬¦3), we propose D REAM AVOID , a critical-phase test-time dreaming framework for VLA manipulation. The core idea is that the robot directly executes the base VLA policy during most time steps, and only triggers test-time dreaming when it predicts an imminent transition into a critical phase. Specifically, D REAM AVOID consists of three modules: (1) 

Dream Trigger , which monitors the current state, identifies critical phases, and issues intervention commands; (2) Action Proposer , responsible for sampling multiple action chunks from VLA; (3) 

Dream Evaluator , which utilizes a world model to forward-simulate the short-horizon future of these candidate actions, and integrates a value model to score and rank them. Through this design, DREAM AVOID allocates compute-intensive failure-aware reasoning to the truly important moments. 

Problem Formulation. We consider a trajectory Žä = {(ot, l, a t)}Tt=1 , where ot denotes the visual observation at time t, l is the language instruction, and at is the robot action. Param-eterized via flow matching , the base VLA policy ŽĆ╬Ė predicts an action chunk of horizon H,

ut = [ at, a t+1 , . . . , a t+HŌłÆ1], such that ut Ōł╝ ŽĆ╬Ė (┬Ę | ot, l ). Although directly executing the base policy is computationally efficient, it is susceptible to local errors during critical phases. Conversely, applying test-time compute or forward simulation at every time step incurs immense computational overhead and latency. Therefore, our problem transforms into designing an adaptive inference strategy: the system identifies critical phases within Žä to selectively allocate test-time compute. 

4.1 Dream Trigger 

The first step of D REAM AVOID is to determine whether the current state has entered a critical phase. We introduce a lightweight Dream Trigger pt = fŽĢ(OtŌłÆK+1: t, s t), whose inputs are (1) single- or multi-view observations from the recent K frames OtŌłÆK+1: t = {otŌłÆK+1 , . . . , o t}, and (2) current proprioceptive state st. The output of the Dream Trigger is the probability pt Ōłł [0 , 1] that the current 4main view left wrist view                 

> 020 40 60 80 100
> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1.0
> probability
> frame index (extracted FPS) MAE( pt, ╠ā yt) = 0.022 ╠ā
> yt(soft label)
> pt(Dream Trigger)
> ╬│= 0.5
> tcrit
> right wrist view
> early f=12, p=0.00, ß╗╣=0.00 pre-crit f=39, p=0.02, ß╗╣=0.00 key frame ( tcrit )f=66, p=0.61, ß╗╣=0.50 late f=96, p=1.00, ß╗╣=1.00

Figure 2: Qualitative example of the Dream Trigger ( ╬▓ = 5 frames in the soft label ╦£yt). state has entered a critical phase. After collecting data via teleoperation, we manually annotate the timestamp tcrit of entering the critical phase. Directly using a hard label yt = I[t Ōēź tcrit ] is susceptible to human annotation bias, so we design a soft label ╦£yt = Sigmoid  (t ŌłÆ tcrit )/╬▓ . This is equivalent to applying a soft transition within the range of [tcrit ŌłÆ ╬▓, t crit + ╬▓]. The Dream Trigger is supervised using binary cross-entropy with class-balanced weights: 

Ltrigger = ŌłÆ 1

T

> T

X

> t=1

[w+ ╦£yt log pt + (1 ŌłÆ ╦£yt) log(1 ŌłÆ pt)] . (1) The weight w+ = NŌłÆ/N + is used to compensate for the critical / non-critical frame ratio. For each real-world or simulation task in this paper, we select 100 videos for tcrit annotation. The triggering condition for the Dream Trigger is ctest  

> t

= I[pt Ōēź ╬│], where ╬│ is the trigger threshold. When ctest  

> t

= 0 , the system is in the regular phase and directly executes the action chunk output by the base policy, ensuring execution efficiency and coherence. Conversely, when ctest  

> t

= 1 , the Dream Trigger instructs the system to enter the critical phase (Figure 2). See Appendix C.1 for details. 

4.2 Action Proposer 

When the system determines that it is currently in a critical phase, D REAM AVOID does not discard the base VLA policy, but instead continues to use it as a generator for candidate actions. In this paper, the base policy is modeled using flow matching, progressively mapping noise into an action chunk by integrating a conditional velocity field within the action space. During standard inference, this generation process corresponds to a deterministic probability flow ODE trajectory; thus, given an observation and language instruction, it typically outputs only one default action chunk. To obtain multiple candidate action chunks during testing, D REAM AVOID replaces this deterministic ODE inference process with its corresponding stochastic SDE sampling process [ 24 , 25 ]. Standard flow matching inference corresponds to the following probability flow ODE: 

du = v╬Ė (u, Žü | ot, l ) d Žü, (2) where Žü Ōłł [0 , 1] denotes the internal flow matching time variable, and v╬Ė is the conditional velocity field that determines the deterministic evolution trajectory of the action chunk from the initial noise distribution to the target distribution. To support multi-candidate sampling during testing, we reformulate it into the corresponding stochastic process: 

du = v╬Ė (u, Žü | ot, l ) d Žü + Žā(Žü) d wŽü, (3) where Žā(Žü) controls the sampling noise intensity, and wŽü denotes the Wiener process. In practice, we adopt a constant noise scheduling strategy. The specific values of Žā for different tasks can be found in Table 3, Appendix C.2. By repeating this stochastic sampling process, we can generate multiple candidate action chunks for the same time step to be used for the Dream Evaluator. This design serves two primary purposes. First, all candidate actions still originate from the velocity field of the same pre-trained policy; therefore, they are not blind searches in an unconstrained action space, but are consistently bounded by the task semantics and action priors encoded in the base policy. Second, the randomness introduced by SDE allows the system to expose multiple locally plausible action hypotheses, which would often collapse into a single prediction under standard ODE inference. This is particularly crucial during critical phases: multiple seemingly reasonable action chunks might lead to drastically different downstream outcomes. For example, one candidate might accomplish precise alignment, while another might cause lateral deviation, collision, or object slipping. 54.3 Dream Evaluator 

Action-conditioned world models provide a natural mechanism for evaluating the subsequent effects of candidate actions. DreamDojo [ 8], which is pre-trained on large-scale videos and post-trained on robotics data, provides rich physical priors of manipulation tasks for test-time dreaming. Specifically, for each candidate action chunk u(k) 

> t

and current observation ot, we use the distilled DreamDojo (Appendix C.3.1) to predict its corresponding future observation sequence ╦åy(k) 

> t

= WŽł (ot, u (k) 

> t

). We define the value of a candidate action chunk as the real progress delta it brings within the short-horizon window. Built upon a VLM trained on a large-scale dataset, Robometer [ 26 ] acts as a general-purpose robotic reward model capable of predicting frame-level task progress ╬Ę Ōłł [0 , 1] . This allows us to automatically compute the continuous labels z(k) 

> t

for the corresponding trajectories (Appendix C.3.2). During the training of the value model, the model needs to learn accurate physical consequences from clear, real-world videos. However, during test time, it only receives video prediction ╦åy(k)

> t

generated by DreamDojo, which may contain blurriness or artifacts. To balance learning efficiency and overcome this domain shift, we employ a real-dream joint training strategy. When constructing the inputs for the task-specific value model, (1) we directly input the real future sequence ytrue  

> t

into the model (fitting VŽē (ot, u t, y true  

> t

) ŌåÆ zt), enabling the network to learn precise value mappings based on lossless visual features; (2) we input (ot, u t) into DreamDojo to generate dreams ╦åyt and use them as inputs as well (fitting VŽē (ot, u t, ╦åyt) ŌåÆ zt). By treating the generated sequences as a form of in-domain data augmentation, we force the value model to learn to extract crucial physical progress features despite the visual imperfections of DreamDojo. During this process, the ground-truth labels 

zt required for the aforementioned fitting are all obtained by using Robometer to score the real future trajectories ytrue  

> t

sampled from the offline dataset. Furthermore, the vast majority of routine offline teleoperation trajectories are in a state of steady progression (exhibiting small positive progress deltas). Direct random sampling would cause the model to lose its discriminative power for dangerous situations. To address this, we employ priority-based oversampling when constructing the training batch B: 20% of the data is sampled from the terminal state horizons of successful completions, 40% is drawn from the additionally collected boundary and failure data (see ┬¦4.4, including crash data penalized to z = ŌłÆ1), and the remaining 40% comes from routine steady progression phases. We jointly use a Huber robust regression loss [27] and a continuous margin ranking loss: 

LVE = 1

|B| 

X

> iŌłłB

L╬┤ (╦å v(i), z (i)) + ╬╗rank 

|P| 

X

> (i,j )ŌłłP

max 



0, ŌłÆ(╦å v(i) ŌłÆ ╦åv(j)) + ╬▒(z(i) ŌłÆ z(j))



, (4) where ╦åv(i) and z(i) are the predicted progress delta and the ground truth for the i-th flattened sample in batch B, respectively. P = {(i, j ) Ōłł B | z(i) > z (j)} is the set of valid training pairs, L╬┤ denotes the Huber loss, ╬╗rank balances the two loss terms, and ╬▒ is a scaling factor requiring the networkŌĆÖs predicted score difference to open up a corresponding margin. During testing, the Dream Evaluator selects the candidate action with the highest predicted progress delta ╦åv(k).

4.4 Dream the Boundaries: Autonomous Learning from Success, Failure & Boundary Cases (a) Narrowly complete the task  (b) Fail due to a single misstep 

Figure 3: Boundary data in Donline .DREAM AVOID introduces failure and boundary data to generate discriminative and informative ŌĆ£dreams.ŌĆØ Let D+ and DŌłÆ denote the sets of successful and failed trajectories, respectively. The base policy is trained exclusively on D+, ensuring that its intuitive actions while ŌĆ£awakeŌĆØ only imitate effective behaviors, thereby preventing failure modes from being mixed into the action distribution. Conversely, the Dream Evaluator, the engine for test-time dreaming, is jointly trained on D+ Ōł¬ D ŌłÆ.The motivation behind this design is that, if trained only on successful data, the world model will 6tend to generate ŌĆ£optimistic dreamsŌĆØ (as observed in ┬¦3 and related work [ 28 , 29 ]). It easily learns what success looks like, but struggles to clearly identify which locally feasible actions will actually lead to failure. Especially in fine-grained manipulation tasks, visually subtle deviations can result in drastically different outcomes. By incorporating failure trajectories, the world model effectively learns the critical boundaries between success and failure. However, human teleoperation datasets Dteleop primarily consist of successful demonstrations, making it difficult to provide informative failure cases. To endow the world model with true failure awareness, we propose an autonomous boundary learning paradigm. We deploy the initial version of DREAM AVOID (trained only on Dteleop ), obtaining a mixed dataset Donline that contains successful, boundary, and failed trajectories. At critical phases, the Action Proposer actively explores the action manifold and generates diverse candidate actions. Due to the optimistic hallucinations of the initial Dream Evaluator, it inevitably misjudges locally plausible but globally dangerous actions as safe, thereby naturally exposing the system to trickier boundary cases. These boundary data can either result in narrowly completing the task or lead to failure by a single misstep (Figure 3). The collected empirical data is assigned value labels zt (defined in ┬¦4.3). Subsequently, we combine Donline with 

Dteleop to fine-tune the Dream Evaluator. 

## 5 Real-World Experiments 

We conduct real-world experiments on the AgileX PiperX robotic platform, which is equipped with one front camera (RealSense D455) and two wrist cameras (RealSense D435), as shown in Figure 4. The robot receives RGB observations and language instructions, and executes the action chunks output by the policy. We design four real-world manipulation tasks for evaluation that require accurate spatial alignment, stable contact establishment, and failure avoidance, including Cup Sleeving , Charger Plugging , Cap Opening , and Screw Insertion . Compared to typical scenarios, these tasks are much more sensitive to small action deviations. The specific task instructions and sample observations from the three viewpoints can be found in Table 4 and Appendix D.2. 

Evaluated Methods. To conduct a comprehensive evaluation, we compare D REAM AVOID with baseline methods and introduce different variants of D REAM AVOID . We compare D REAM AVOID 

with the following baselines: (1) Base VLA policy: directly executes the action chunk output by ŽĆ0.5.(2) GPC-RANK [ 10 ]: this method constantly samples multiple candidate action chunks during testing and utilizes a world model for online ranking. We use GPC-RANK as the primary baseline to validate the effectiveness of several designs in D REAM AVOID : First, regarding the trigger timing, GPC-RANK is a computationally intensive always-on intervention, whereas D REAM AVOID implements a more efficient critical-phase intervention. Second, in terms of consequence prediction, GPC-RANKŌĆÖs world model relies solely on expert data and random exploration for training, while our Dream Evaluator not only possesses physical priors from large-scale pre-training, but also masters an explicit boundary awareness of critical failures through joint training on real failure and boundary data. Finally, unlike GPC-RANK, which relies on explicit state distances or zero-shot VLM scoring, D REAM AVOID 

adopts more robust progress value evaluation. To ensure experimental fairness, both are evaluated based on the same base policy ŽĆ0.5. To demonstrate the contributions of our training paradigm (see ┬¦4.3 and ┬¦4.4), we define two variants of our method based on the training data distribution: (1) DREAM AVOID -Vanilla (hereafter DA-Vanilla ): Both the base VLA policy and the Dream Evaluator are trained exclusively on the human teleoperation dataset Dteleop . (2) D REAM AVOID -ABL (hereafter 

DA-ABL ): This represents the full D REAM AVOID framework incorporating Autonomous Boundary Learning. The base policy remains trained solely on Dteleop , while the Dream Evaluator is fine-tuned on the mixed dataset Dteleop Ōł¬ D online .

Results. Figure 4 summarizes the real-world results. D REAM AVOID consistently outperforms the base policy and the GPC-RANK method across all tasks. DA-ABL achieves the highest average success rate of 72.5%, surpassing the base policy ( ŽĆ0.5, 48.8%) by 23.7%. Additionally, it surpasses the baseline method GPC-RANK (54.4%) in average success rate by 18.1%. This demonstrates that selective, failure-aware test-time dreaming with rich physical priors is beneficial. Different variants of D REAM AVOID also reveal the importance of our training paradigm. DA-Vanilla already yields an average improvement of 18.1% over the base policy. However, incorporating autonomous boundary learning (DA-ABL) brings an additional 5.6% performance improvement. Since DA-Vanilla is trained exclusively on successful demonstration trajectories, its world model tends to generate optimistic 7dreams, which limits its ability to intervene effectively during critical phases. In contrast, DA-ABL enhances the world modelŌĆÖs failure awareness by incorporating boundary and failure trajectories. ŽĆ0.5  GPC-RANK  DA-Vanilla  DA-ABL                 

> Cup Sleeving Charger Plugging Cap Opening Screw Insertion Average
> 0
> 20
> 40
> 60
> 80
> 100
> Success Rate (%)
> 63.0 60.0
> 82.5 90.0
> 48.0 55.0 60.0 67.5
> 55.0
> 67.5
> 80.0 80.0
> 30.0 35.0 45.0 52.5 49.0 54.4
> 66.9 72.5 Critical
> Phase
> Real-World Setup
> Leader Arms
> Follower Arms
> Main
> Camera
> Left Wrist
> Camera
> Right Wrist
> Camera

Figure 4: Comparisons in the real world. Each real-world task is evaluated over 40 independent trials. DREAM AVOID significantly reduces failures caused by lateral drift, premature collisions, and contact misalignment. In several experimental trajectories, the base policy produces reasonable actions at most time steps, but makes locally plausible yet globally detrimental decisions as it approaches the critical phase. By sampling multiple candidate action chunks and explicitly evaluating their short-horizon downstream consequences, D REAM AVOID is able to reject these failure-prone proposals and instead execute actions that are more consistently aligned with task progression. A key design of D REAM AVOID is to intervene only during the critical phase. Experimental results demonstrate that this strategy achieves a better balance between performance and computational overhead (Table 5, Appendix D.3). Methods like GPC-RANK, which perform candidate evaluation at every timestep, not only incur higher overhead but also cause significant jitter in the robot armŌĆÖs trajectory. In contrast, D REAM AVOID achieves higher computational efficiency while maintaining smooth and reliable physical interaction. 

Ablation Study. We conduct ablation studies to analyze the contribution of the modules in D REA -

> M

AVOID to the performance improvement. All ablation experiments are conducted on real-world manipulation tasks. (1) Action Proposer vs. Repeated ODE. We analyze the impact of the candidate action generation method on system performance. To ensure a fair comparison, we construct a strong baseline (Repeated ODE + DA-ABL Dream Evaluator): it retains the Dream Evaluator of DA-ABL, but replaces the candidate action generation mechanism by inputting different random initial noises into the base policy and running deterministic flow inference multiple times to generate the same num-ber of candidate actions. However, Table 2 shows that even when equipped with the strongest Dream Evaluator, the average success rate of Repeated ODE is only 57.5%, which is far inferior to the full method DA-ABL using SDE sampling (72.5%). This aligns with the principle of ŌĆ£garbage in, garbage outŌĆØ: if the Action Proposer cannot provide high-quality candidate solutions, leading to a severely homogenized candidate pool, then even if the Dream Evaluator can identify impending disasters, it cannot save the system. This indicates that, compared to deterministic trajectories that only alter the noise at the initial timestep (ODE), the continuous random injection of SDE during the denoising process can explore the action manifold more effectively, exposing richer and higher-quality feasible solutions. Such sample diversity is crucial for avoiding subtle failure boundaries during critical phases. (2) Dream Evaluator vs. Random Select. We verify the necessity of world-model-based consequence evaluation by replacing the Dream Evaluator with random selection within the SDE candidate pool. Table 2 shows that the average success rate of the random select variant is only 45.0%, which is not only much lower than DA-ABL (72.5%), but even lower than the base policy (48.8%). This demonstrates that the candidate diversity created by the Action Proposer alone is not 8sufficient to avoid failures. In critical phases with extremely low error tolerance, blind diversity can instead introduce harmful jitters. Because disastrous physical conflicts may be hidden within locally reasonable candidate actions, once the system randomly selects these failure-prone actions, it will lead to irreversible collisions. Therefore, the system must rely on an evaluation mechanism capable of explicitly foreseeing the physical consequences of actions to pick out safe action paths from diverse hypotheses. Table 2: Ablation study results.                                     

> Method Components Task Success Rate (%) Average Action Proposer Dream Evaluator Cup Charger Cap Screw
> ŽĆ0.5├Ś(Single ODE) ├Ś62.5 47.5 55.0 30.0 48.8 DREAM AVOID Variants ├Ś(Repeated ODE) Ō£ō67.5 55.0 70.0 37.5 57.5
> Ō£ō(SDE) ├Ś(Random Select) 65.0 35.0 55.0 25.0 45.0 DA-ABL Ō£ōŌ£ō90.0 67.5 80.0 52.5 72.5

## 6 LIBERO and SimplerEnv Benchmarks 

We evaluate on two simulation benchmarks: LIBERO [ 16 ] and SimplerEnv [ 17 ]. The base policy adopted for LIBERO is ŽĆ0.5, while SimplerEnv uses GR00T-N1.6 [ 30 ]. This design aims to verify that D REAM AVOID can generalize to other flow policies. Unlike real-world experiments that rely on human-annotated visual frames, we directly leverage the precise underlying physical states of the simulator to locate the critical phase (Appendix E). Experimental results show (Table 6 and Table 7, Appendix E) that the DA-ABL method achieves an average success rate of 97.8% on LIBERO (outperforming the base policy ŽĆ0.5ŌĆÖs 96.5% and GPC-RANKŌĆÖs 96.6%), and attains average performances of 63.6% and 80.7% on SimplerEnvŌĆÖs Bridge and Fractal datasets, respectively. This comprehensively surpasses both the base policy GR00T-N1.6 (59.9% and 76.4%, respectively) and the GPC-RANK method (61.1% and 78.2%, respectively). This fully demonstrates that D REAM AVOID 

possesses the same advantages in simulation environments, and that autonomous boundary learning can effectively enhance the modelŌĆÖs robustness when facing local deviations in critical phases. 

## 7 Limitation & Future Works 

First, adapting the plug-and-play safety layer D REAM AVOID to other policies (world action models or traditional control policies) is a promising direction. Second, although D REAM AVOID strictly limits dense computations to sparse critical phases, generating high-fidelity future videos and scoring multiple candidate actions still introduces latency. Future work could not only employ various video generation acceleration techniques, but also opt to execute forward outcome simulations within a compact latent space. Third, beyond optimizing decision-making at test-time, future work could leverage the high-fidelity videos generated by the world model as a rich source of training data, utilizing methods like advantage-weighted regression to continuously update the base policy itself. A comprehensive discussion of limitations and future work is in Appendix F. 

## 8 Conclusion 

This paper explores the issue of failure avoidance in VLA models. Although existing models possess strong intuitive execution capabilities, they still face limitations in anticipating risks. In contrast, explicit spatio-temporal simulation directly provides the foresight necessary to avoid failures. To this end, we propose the D REAM AVOID framework. Through critical-phase test-time dreaming, DREAM AVOID decouples intuitive execution from foresight by simulating the short-horizon futures of candidate actions during critical phases to select the optimal action. To alleviate the challenge of state evaluation in complex scenarios, we introduce an autonomous boundary learning paradigm, enabling the model to better grasp the boundaries between success and failure. Experiments demonstrate that DREAM AVOID can effectively intercept local errors before they escalate. In summary, we emphasize that test-time dreaming matters; integrating intuitive execution with selective dreaming at test time is an effective pathway to enhancing the reliability of VLAs. Through critical-phase dreaming, we can achieve more robust error avoidance capabilities without a significant increase in inference costs. 9References 

[1] Moo Jin Kim, Karl Pertsch, Siddharth Karamcheti, Ted Xiao, Ashwin Balakrishna, Suraj Nair, Rafael Rafailov, Ethan P Foster, Pannag R Sanketi, Quan Vuong, et al. Openvla: An open-source vision-language-action model. In Conference on Robot Learning , pages 2679ŌĆō2713. PMLR, 2025. [2] Kevin Black, Noah Brown, James Darpinian, Karan Dhabalia, Danny Driess, Adnan Esmail, Michael Robert Equi, Chelsea Finn, Niccolo Fusai, Manuel Y. Galliker, Dibya Ghosh, Lachy Groom, Karol Hausman, brian ichter, Szymon Jakubczak, Tim Jones, Liyiming Ke, Devin LeBlanc, Sergey Levine, Adrian Li-Bell, Mohith Mothukuri, Suraj Nair, Karl Pertsch, Allen Z. Ren, Lucy Xiaoyang Shi, Laura Smith, Jost Tobias Springenberg, Kyle Stachowicz, James Tanner, Quan Vuong, Homer Walke, Anna Walling, Haohuan Wang, Lili Yu, and Ury Zhilinsky. 

ŽĆ0.5: a vision-language-action model with open-world generalization. In Joseph Lim, Shuran Song, and Hae-Won Park, editors, Proceedings of The 9th Conference on Robot Learning ,volume 305, pages 17ŌĆō40. PMLR, 2025. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v305/ black25a.html .[3] Kevin Black, Noah Brown, Danny Driess, Adnan Esmail, Michael Equi, Chelsea Finn, Niccolo Fusai, Lachy Groom, Karol Hausman, Brian Ichter, et al. ŽĆ0: A vision-language-action flow model for general robot control. In Proceedings of Robotics: Science and Systems (RSS) , 2025. [4] Charles Xu, Jost Tobias Springenberg, Michael Equi, Ali Amin, Adnan Esmail, Sergey Levine, and Liyiming Ke. Rl token: Bootstrapping online rl with vision-language-action models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.23073 , 2026. [5] Heng Zhang, Rui Dai, Gokhan Solak, Pokuang Zhou, Yu She, and Arash Ajoudani. Safe learning for contact-rich robot tasks: A survey from classical learning-based methods to safe foundation models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.11908 , 2025. [6] Songqiao Hu, Zeyi Liu, Shuang Liu, Jun Cen, Zihan Meng, and Xiao He. Vlsa: Vision-language-action models with plug-and-play safety constraint layer. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.11891 ,2025. [7] Yujiro Onishi, Ryo Takizawa, Yoshiyuki Ohmura, and Yasuo Kuniyoshi. Exploration-assisted bottleneck transition toward robust and data-efficient deformable object manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.13756 , 2026. [8] Shenyuan Gao, William Liang, Kaiyuan Zheng, Ayaan Malik, Seonghyeon Ye, Sihyun Yu, Wei-Cheng Tseng, Yuzhu Dong, Kaichun Mo, Chen-Hsuan Lin, et al. Dreamdojo: A generalist robot world model from large-scale human videos. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.06949 , 2026. [9] Jacky Kwok, Christopher Agia, Rohan Sinha, Matt Foutter, Shulu Li, Ion Stoica, Azalia Mirhoseini, and Marco Pavone. Robomonkey: Scaling test-time sampling and verification for vision-language-action models. In Conference on Robot Learning , pages 3200ŌĆō3217. PMLR, 2025. [10] Han Qi, Haocheng Yin, Aris Zhu, Yilun Du, and Heng Yang. Inference-time enhancement of generative robot policies via predictive world modeling. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters ,2026. [11] Chelsea Finn and Sergey Levine. Deep visual foresight for planning robot motion. In 2017 IEEE international conference on robotics and automation (ICRA) , pages 2786ŌĆō2793. IEEE, 2017. [12] Wenkai Guo, Guanxing Lu, Haoyuan Deng, Zhenyu Wu, Yansong Tang, and Ziwei Wang. Vla-reasoner: Empowering vision-language-action models with reasoning via online monte carlo tree search. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.22643 , 2025. [13] Yalcin Tur, Jalal Naghiyev, Haoquan Fang, Wei-Chuan Tsai, Jiafei Duan, Dieter Fox, and Ranjay Krishna. RECURRENT-DEPTH VLA: IMPLICIT TEST-TIME COMPUTE SCALING OF VISIONŌĆōLANGUAGEŌĆōACTION MODELS VIA LATENT ITERATIVE REASONING. In Workshop on Latent & Implicit Thinking ŌĆō Going Beyond CoT Reasoning , 2026. URL 

https://openreview.net/forum?id=hsIm52gD9p .10 [14] Yanting Yang, Shenyuan Gao, Qingwen Bu, Li Chen, and Dimitris N Metaxas. Seeing farther and smarter: Value-guided multi-path reflection for vlm policy optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.19372 , 2026. [15] Kun Wu, Ning Liu, Zhen Zhao, Di Qiu, Jinming Li, Zhengping Che, Zhiyuan Xu, and Jian Tang. Learning from imperfect demonstrations with self-supervision for robotic manipulation. In 

2025 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , pages 16899ŌĆō16906. IEEE, 2025. [16] Bo Liu, Yifeng Zhu, Chongkai Gao, Yihao Feng, Qiang Liu, Yuke Zhu, and Peter Stone. Libero: Benchmarking knowledge transfer for lifelong robot learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36:44776ŌĆō44791, 2023. [17] Xuanlin Li, Kyle Hsu, Jiayuan Gu, Oier Mees, Karl Pertsch, Homer Rich Walke, Chuyuan Fu, Ishikaa Lunawat, Isabel Sieh, Sean Kirmani, et al. Evaluating real-world robot manipulation policies in simulation. In Conference on Robot Learning , pages 3705ŌĆō3728. PMLR, 2025. [18] Changyu Liu, Yiyang Liu, Taowen Wang, Qiao Zhuang, James Chenhao Liang, Wenhao Yang, Renjing Xu, Qifan Wang, Dongfang Liu, and Cheng Han. On-the-fly vla adaptation via test-time reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.06748 , 2026. [19] Zechen Bai, Chen Gao, and Mike Zheng Shou. Evolve-vla: Test-time training from environment feedback for vision-language-action models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.14666 , 2025. [20] Yunhai Feng, Jiaming Han, Zhuoran Yang, Xiangyu Yue, Sergey Levine, and Jianlan Luo. Reflective planning: Vision-language models for multi-stage long-horizon robotic manipulation. In Conference on Robot Learning , pages 2038ŌĆō2062. PMLR, 2025. [21] Cheng Chi, Zhenjia Xu, Siyuan Feng, Eric Cousineau, Yilun Du, Benjamin Burchfiel, Russ Tedrake, and Shuran Song. Diffusion policy: Visuomotor policy learning via action diffusion. 

The International Journal of Robotics Research , 44(10-11):1684ŌĆō1704, 2025. [22] The Gemini Team. Gemini 3.1 pro: A smarter model for your most com-plex tasks. https://blog.google/innovation-and-ai/models-and-research/ gemini-models/gemini-3-1-pro/ , 2026. [23] Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems , 33:1877ŌĆō1901, 2020. [24] Jie Liu, Gongye Liu, Jiajun Liang, Yangguang Li, Jiaheng Liu, Xintao Wang, Pengfei Wan, Di ZHANG, and Wanli Ouyang. Flow-grpo: Training flow matching models via online rl. In 

The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , 2025. [25] Kang Chen, Zhihao Liu, Tonghe Zhang, Zhen Guo, Si Xu, Hao Lin, Hongzhi Zang, Quanlu Zhang, Zhaofei Yu, Guoliang Fan, et al. ŽĆrl: Online rl fine-tuning for flow-based vision-language-action models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.25889 , 2025. [26] Anthony Liang, Yigit Korkmaz, Jiahui Zhang, Minyoung Hwang, Abrar Anwar, Sidhant Kaushik, Aditya Shah, Alex S Huang, Luke Zettlemoyer, Dieter Fox, et al. Robometer: Scaling general-purpose robotic reward models via trajectory comparisons. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.02115 , 2026. [27] Peter J Huber. Robust estimation of a location parameter. In Breakthroughs in statistics: Methodology and distribution , pages 492ŌĆō518. Springer, 1992. [28] Yanjiang Guo, Tony Lee, Lucy Xiaoyang Shi, Jianyu Chen, Percy Liang, and Chelsea Finn. Vlaw: Iterative co-improvement of vision-language-action policy and world model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.12063 , 2026. [29] Tenny Yin, Zhiting Mei, Zhonghe Zheng, Miyu Yamane, David Wang, Jade Sceats, Samuel M Bateman, Lihan Zha, Apurva Badithela, Ola Shorinwa, et al. Playworld: Learning robot world models from autonomous play. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.09030 , 2026. 11 [30] Johan Bjorck, Fernando Casta├▒eda, Nikita Cherniadev, Xingye Da, Runyu Ding, Linxi Fan, Yu Fang, Dieter Fox, Fengyuan Hu, Spencer Huang, et al. Gr00t n1: An open foundation model for generalist humanoid robots. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.14734 , 2025. [31] Jiafei Duan, Wilbert Pumacay, Nishanth Kumar, Yi Ru Wang, Shulin Tian, Wentao Yuan, Ranjay Krishna, Dieter Fox, Ajay Mandlekar, and Yijie Guo. Aha: A vision-language-model for detecting and reasoning over failures in robotic manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.00371 ,2024. [32] Zeyi Liu, Arpit Bahety, and Shuran Song. Reflect: Summarizing robot experiences for failure explanation and correction. In Conference on Robot Learning , pages 3468ŌĆō3484. PMLR, 2023. [33] Qiao Gu, Yuanliang Ju, Shengxiang Sun, Igor Gilitschenski, Haruki Nishimura, Masha Itkina, and Florian Shkurti. SAFE: Multitask failure detection for vision-language-action models. In 

The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , 2025. URL 

https://openreview.net/forum?id=XPyAukgsFf .[34] Huanyu Li, Kun Lei, Sheng Zang, Kaizhe Hu, Yongyuan Liang, Bo An, Xiaoli Li, and Huazhe Xu. Failure-aware rl: Reliable offline-to-online reinforcement learning with self-recovery for real-world manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.07821 , 2026. [35] Seonghyeon Ye, Yunhao Ge, Kaiyuan Zheng, Shenyuan Gao, Sihyun Yu, George Kurian, Suneel Indupuru, You Liang Tan, Chuning Zhu, Jiannan Xiang, et al. World action models are zero-shot policies. In ICLR 2026 the 2nd Workshop on World Models: Understanding, Modelling and Scaling , 2026. [36] Maxime Oquab, Timoth├®e Darcet, Th├®o Moutakanni, Huy Vo, Marc Szafraniec, Vasil Khalidov, Pierre Fernandez, Daniel Haziza, Francisco Massa, Alaaeldin El-Nouby, et al. Dinov2: Learning robust visual features without supervision. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.07193 , 2023. [37] Xun Huang, Zhengqi Li, Guande He, Mingyuan Zhou, and Eli Shechtman. Self forcing: Bridging the train-test gap in autoregressive video diffusion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.08009 ,2025. 

## A Extended Related Work 

Failure Detection. Handling failures is typically viewed as a reactive process: the system must first detect the occurrence of an error and subsequently attempt to correct it. For instance, AHA [ 31 ] intro-duces an instruction-fine-tuned VLM specifically designed to detect and reason about manipulation failures using natural language. REFLECT [ 32 ] explains failures and proposes corrective suggestions by summarizing the robotŌĆÖs experiences. Furthermore, SAFE proposes a multi-task failure detector for general-purpose VLAs, which predicts the probability of task failure in real-time by analyzing the modelŌĆÖs internal latent features [ 33 ]. While these post-hoc reasoning capabilities are invaluable for offline policy improvement, reward generation, and sub-task verification, they inherently operate only after a failure has already occurred. To achieve a safer execution process, our work shifts the reasoning focus of the system from reactive failure detection to proactive avoidance. Instead of waiting for a failure to happen before reasoning, DREAM AVOID utilizes test-time dreaming to explicitly forward-simulate the consequences of candi-date actions. By invoking this failure-aware evaluation at critical phases, D REAM AVOID is able to intercept minor action deviations before they accumulate into irreversible failures. Consequently, our approach acts as a preventive safety layer, effectively complementing the aforementioned works. 

World Models. World models provide a natural mechanism for evaluating the downstream conse-quences of candidate actions. DreamDojo shows that action-conditioned world models, pretrained on large-scale video data and then post-trained on robot data, can support physically meaningful future prediction [ 8 ]. Prior work such as VLAW [ 28 ] and FARL [ 34 ] show that failed trajectories are important for improving robot robustness, recovery ability, and feasibility judgment. 12 B Pilot Study Details 

To evaluate the modelŌĆÖs reasoning capabilities during the critical phase of fine-grained manipulation, we establish a standardized evaluation setup. 

Common Setup. Human annotators manually identified a critical interaction frame tcrit in each test trajectory. At each tcrit , we extract the current frame ot along with a historical observation sequence consisting of 5 frames with a sampling stride of 8. Each frame is constructed by concatenating three camera views (the main view and the left and right wrist views) into a 2├Ś2 grid (with the bottom-right corner filled in black). At this moment, the base policy ŽĆ0.5 predicts an action chunk of length H = 50 (approximately 1.67 s in a 30 fps video). The action consists of 6-dimensional absolute joint angles and the gripper state for both the left and right arms, totaling 14 dimensions. To align with the inference frequency of the world model and reduce the text comprehension burden on the VLM, we downsample the future action chunk using a stride of 4, extracting 13 actions with indices [0 , 4, 8, . . . , 48] . This sparse action sequence ut spans 48 time steps, corresponding to an execution window of approximately 1.6 s into the future. 

Setup for Explicit Spatiotemporal Dreaming. The historical observation stride is 8, and the future action sequence stride is 4. A sparser visual history is sufficient to capture the macroscopic motion context. However, accurately predicting the physical evolution of the critical phase, which is sensitive to minute deviations, requires denser action-conditioned inputs to ensure that the world model can perform precise spatiotemporal rendering. The world model DreamDojo is fine-tuned on 100 human teleoperation trajectories. Figure 5 illustrates the actual execution alongside the future frames predicted by the world model. 

## C DREAM AVOID Framework Details 

The complete execution procedure of D REAM AVOID is summarized in Algorithm 1. 

Algorithm 1 DREAM AVOID 1: Observe current state ot and instruction l 

> 2:

Compute criticality score pt = fŽĢ(OtŌłÆK+1: t, s t) {Dream Trigger}  

> 3:

if pt < ╬│ then  

> 4:

Execute default action chunk ut Ōł╝ ŽĆ╬Ė (┬Ę | ot, l ) {Standard Execution}  

> 5:

else  

> 6:

Sample diverse candidates {u(k) 

> t

}Nc 

> k=1

via SDE solver from ŽĆ╬Ė (┬Ę | ot, l ) {Action Proposer}  

> 7:

for k = 1 to Nc do  

> 8:

Dream future consequence ╦åy(k) 

> t

= WŽł (ot, u (k) 

> t

) {Dream Evaluator}  

> 9:

Evaluate consequence ╦åv(k) 

> t

= VŽē (ot, u (k) 

> t

, ╦åy(k) 

> t

) 

> 10:

end for  

> 11:

Select kŌłŚ = arg max k ╦åv(k) 

> t

{Select the highest value}  

> 12:

Execute u(kŌłŚ) 

> t
> 13:

end if C.1 Dream Trigger 

Considering the requirements for real-time inference speed, we select the frozen DINOv2-ViT-B/14 [ 36 ] as the backbone for Dream Trigger. First, we perform frame-by-frame feature encoding on the images from each camera feed (which include sparsely sampled historical observations and the current frame) and execute average pooling along the temporal dimension. Subsequently, the aggregated single- or multi-camera visual features are concatenated with the current proprioceptive state st and jointly fed into a three-layer MLP classification head to determine the current phase state. In real-world deployment, we configure Dream Trigger to poll asynchronously at a frequency of 1 Hz, which is shorter than the 1.67 s execution cycle of the action chunk. Testing shows that on a single RTX 4090 GPU, the single forward inference latency of the Dream Trigger is approximately 50 ms, 13 (a) 

> (b)
> (c)

Figure 5: (a) shows the current frame tcrit , while (b) and (c) show the actual future outcome frames (GT) and the video frames predicted by DreamDojo (Pred). Each 2x2 image block contains different camera views: the top-left is the main view, the top-right is the left wrist view, and the bottom-left is the right wrist view. This concatenation method follows the approach of DreamZero [ 35 ] to accommodate the single-image input requirement of DreamDojo. accounting for only 3% of the entire control cycle. This lightweight design ensures that the additional state monitoring process has virtually no impact on the robotŌĆÖs real-time, continuous control. If a task consists of M > 1 key stages (e.g., grasping ŌåÆ alignment), we extend the single-head prediction to a multi-head format: pt = [ p(1)  

> t

, . . . , p (M ) 

> t

] = fŽĢ(┬Ę). Each predicted probability p(m)

> t

corresponds to an independent t(m) 

> crit

and a soft label ╦£y(m) 

> t

= Sigmoid (( t ŌłÆ t(m)

> crit

)/╬▓ ). The total loss is the sum of the Binary Cross Entropy (BCE) for each stage: 

Lmulti trigger =

> M

X

> m=1

L(m) 

> trigger

(5) 14 The inference trigger condition is modified to ctest  

> t

= I max m p(m) 

> t

Ōēź ╬│, meaning test-time dreaming is activated if any stage triggers. This multi-head design shares the same backbone as the single-head version, with only the final layer of the MLP expanded from a 1D output to M

dimensions. 

C.2 Action Proposer 

Table 3 details the noise level Žā, the number of generated candidate actions Nc, and the action horizon 

H used by the D REAM AVOID and GPC-RANK baselines during SDE sampling in real-world and simulation experiments. The Žā values in the LIBERO benchmark are referenced from ŽĆRL [25 ]. The noise level Žā controls the trade-off between sampling diversity and base policy fidelity. Nc affects the size and diversity of the action candidate pool. The action horizon H determines the length of the generated candidate action chunks, a setting that varies depending on the specific task and the requirements of the base policy. To ensure fairness in the experiments, Nc and H are kept consistent between D REAM AVOID and GPC-RANK. Table 3: Hyperparameters for Action Proposer in real-world and simulation environments, detailing the SDE noise level Žā, action candidate counts Nc, and action horizon H. Both DA-Vanilla and DA-ABL share the same parameters. GPC-RANK utilizes its own generative sampling mechanism rather than SDE sampling, hence the SDE noise level Žā is not applicable (N/A).                           

> Environment Method Task ŽāNcH
> Real-World DREAM AVOID
> Cup Sleeving 0.1 850 Charger Plugging 0.05 Cap Opening 0.08 Screw Insertion 0.05 GPC-RANK All Tasks N/A 850 Simulation DREAM AVOID
> LIBERO Object & Goal 0.3 410 LIBERO Spatial & 10 0.5 10 SimplerEnv 0.3 16 GPC-RANK LIBERO N/A 410 SimplerEnv 16

C.3 Dream Evaluator C.3.1 World Model 

The world model is initialized with DreamDojo-2B [ 8] and post-trained on target robot data. To support low-latency online intervention, we follow the Self Forcing paradigm [ 37 ] to further distill the bidirectional teacher world model into an autoregressive student model. This distillation process consists of two stages: (1) Warmup: under a teacher forcing mechanism, the student modelŌĆÖs predictions are regressed onto the ODE trajectories generated by the teacher. (2) Distillation: utilizing a distribution matching method, the student model is trained autoregressively on its own generated context. This student model replaces the bidirectional attention mechanism with a causal attention mechanism and reduces the number of diffusion sampling steps, thereby achieving efficient online rollout generation while maintaining temporal consistency and action controllability. A single 13-frame video inference takes approximately 2 s on a single RTX 4090 GPU. 

C.3.2 Value Model 

We regress the continuous progress delta within the execution horizon H:

z(k) 

> t

= ╬Ęt+H ŌłÆ ╬Ęt (6) where ╬Ęt Ōłł [0 , 1] is the frame-level progress score provided by Robometer [ 26 ]. This continuous label intuitively reflects the true physical contribution of the action u(k) 

> t

towards task completion. To ensure the network can unambiguously identify catastrophic consequences, we introduce a boundary penalty mechanism. If Robometer predicts an irreversible failure within the horizon (e.g., a dropping object or severe collision causing a precipitous drop in success probability ╬╝t), we forcefully truncate 15 and reset its target label z(k) 

> t

to ŌłÆ1. The final layer of the value model directly outputs the predicted progress delta ╦åv(k) 

> t

via a linear layer. Since the target label z(k) 

> t

is strictly bounded within the [ŌłÆ1, 1] 

range, the network implicitly learns to constrain its unnormalized outputs to a similar range during training. 

## D Real-World Evaluation Details 

D.1 Real-World Deployment Setup 

We deploy our base policy ŽĆ0.5 on a single NVIDIA RTX 4090 GPU. Table 4 details the task specifications, training steps (on 8 NVIDIA A100 GPUs), and demonstration data statistics (episodes and average lengths) for the real-world post-training of ŽĆ0.5.Table 4: Detailed task information for the real-world evaluation tasks. All videos in the teleoperation dataset are recorded at 30 FPS.                     

> Task Name Task Instruction ŽĆ0.5Training Steps Teleop Episodes Avg. Frames Cup Sleeving Pick up the paper cup and put it into the cup sleeve. 40000 100 330.8 Charger Plugging Plug the charger into the socket. 50000 100 336.5 Cap Opening Open the cap of the spray. 50000 100 263.6 Screw Insertion Insert the screw into the hole in the box. 50000 130 313.6

D.2 Multi-View Input Observations for Base Policy 

Figure 6 shows three-view input observations for base policy ŽĆ0.5 in real-world tasks. 

D.3 Latency Analysis and Smooth Transition 

Table 5 details the inference latency of different methods. A single forward pass of the base policy 

ŽĆ0.5 to generate an action chunk of H=50 steps takes approximately 93 ms. During the normal execution phase, the Dream Trigger of D REAM AVOID polls the shared GPU at a frequency of 1 Hz (50 ms per poll), executing in parallel with the base policy inference on a different process. Therefore, it does not introduce observable control loop latency (average GPU utilization <5%). Only when entering a critical phase, which typically occurs only 1 to 3 times per entire trajectory , does the system synchronously and serially execute the Action Proposer and Dream Evaluator, resulting in a 

single intervention latency of approximately 2.1 s .In contrast, always-on test-time methods like GPC-RANK require replanning every 25 steps. This means that for a single action chunk (50 steps) of the base policy, it incurs inference latency twice. For trajectories that typically range from 260 to 340 frames in length (Table 4), GPC-RANK requires 

11-14 full replanning inferences ( each with a latency of 694 ms ). Because D REAM AVOID strictly restricts dense computation to sparse critical phases (typically triggered only 1-3 times globally), its time cost is heavily amortized, thereby maintaining high execution efficiency overall. During test-time dreaming, the robot does not trigger an emergency stop, but instead enters a position-holding state. The high-level ROS nodes are blocked, yet the low-level servos continue to actively track the last published setpoint via PID control, naturally damping the velocity to zero. In the contact phase, this mechanism maintains the instantaneous contact force and avoids the mechanical shock of an E-stop. However, for force-sensitive tasks, this is equivalent to applying a sustained, constant contact force. Because the low-level control loop remains active, the PID controller only generates a steady-state error rather than unbounded integral windup. If the robotic arm experiences minor physical drift during the pause due to gravity or payload, our framework re-initializes the action sequence based on the latest proprioceptive state after inference concludes, thereby eliminating command deviation. To mitigate system jitter at the instant execution resumes, we addressed two core issues: First, to handle the spatial jump between the last setpoint and the first frame of the new action, we implemented trajectory blending, ensuring C0 continuity through forward linear interpolation. Second, the sleep deficits accumulated by the high-level timer can cause an instantaneous burst of commands upon recovery (triggering a velocity step). To resolve this, we explicitly reset the 16 (a) Cup Sleeving 

> (b) Charger Plugging
> (c) Cap Opening
> (d) Screw Insertion

Figure 6: Multi-view input observations for base policy ŽĆ0.5 in real-world tasks (main view | left wrist view | right wrist view). Each row presents three synchronized camera views for a specific task, highlighting the need for accurate spatial alignment and contact establishment. These tasks are sensitive to minor action deviations compared to coarse-grained pick-and-place scenarios. ROS clock and introduce a stabilization buffer right before recovery, effectively achieving a smooth transition. 

## E Simulation Benchmark Details 

Unlike real-world experiments that rely on human-annotated visual frames, we directly leverage the precise underlying physical states of the simulator to locate the critical phase. Specifically, we convert the triggering condition of the Dream Trigger into a spatial distance metric: when the underlying coordinates indicate that the Euclidean distance between the robotŌĆÖs end-effector and the target object is less than a set threshold, the system automatically determines that the critical phase has been entered. Detailed evaluation results on the LIBERO and SimplerEnv benchmarks are shown in Table 6 and Table 7. On SimplerEnv, the different future videos generated by DreamDojo based on 4 candidate action chunks are illustrated in Figure 7. 17 Table 5: Time consumption analysis in the real-world evaluation tasks. 

Method Component Hardware Setup Latency (ms) Base Policy ŽĆ0.5 Action Chunk Gen. ( H=50 ) 1├Ś RTX 4090 93 ┬▒ 5

Est. Total Trajectory Inference (replans every 50 steps, 6ŌĆō7 times / trajectory ) Ōł╝ 0.6ŌĆō0.7 sDREAM AVOID 

Dream Trigger ( Ōł╝1 Hz polling) ŌĆĀ 1├Ś RTX 4090 (Shared Local) 

50 ┬▒ 5

Action Proposer (SDE Sampling, K=8 ) 93 ┬▒ 5

Dream Evaluator (DreamDojo Video Gen) 3├Ś RTX 4090 (Dist.) * 2000 ┬▒ 100 

Dream Evaluator (Value Model Scoring) 40 ┬▒ 5

Total Critical-Phase Intervention (triggered 1ŌĆō3 times / trajectory ) 2133 ┬▒ 110 

Est. Total Trajectory Inference (Base Policy + Interventions ) Ōł╝ 2.7ŌĆō7.0 sGPC-RANK 

ŽĆ0.5 Candidate Sampling ( K=8 )1├Ś RTX 4090 

93 ┬▒ 5

World Model Rollout ( 8 steps ├Ś3 denoise, batch 8) 600 ┬▒ 4

Reward Predictor (ResNet-18, batch 8) 1 ┬▒ 0.6

Total Per-Replan (replans every 25 steps, 11ŌĆō14 times / trajectory ) 694 ┬▒ 9.6

Est. Total Trajectory Inference (Base Policy + Interventions ) Ōł╝ 7.6ŌĆō9.7 s    

> ŌĆĀRuns in parallel with ŽĆ0.5on a separate process; not additive to per-step latency.
> *8 parallel instances are co-located on 3 GPUs ( Ōł╝7.5 GB VRAM each instance).

Table 6: Comparisons on the LIBERO benchmark. Each task is tested 200 times. 

Method Success Rate (%) Object Goal 10 Spatial Average Maximum Step 280 300 520 220 330 

ŽĆ0.5 98.0 98.0 91.0 99.0 96.5 GPC-RANK 99.0 97.5 92.0 98.0 96.6 DA-Vanilla 98.5 97.0 93.0 98.5 96.8 DA-ABL 98.5 99.0 94.5 99.0 97.8 

Table 7: Comparisons on the SimplerEnv benchmark. Each task is tested 200 times. 

Task GR00T-N1.6 GPC-RANK DA-Vanilla DA-ABL Bridge Dataset (WidowX Robot) Success Rate (%) widowx_spoon_on_towel 62.5 64.5 65.0 67.0 

widowx_carrot_on_plate 63.0 64.0 64.0 65.5 

widowx_put_eggplant_in_basket 89.5 91.0 92.5 95.0 

widowx_stack_cube 4.0 6.0 5.5 7.0 

widowx_put_eggplant_in_sink 38.0 38.0 40.5 41.0 

widowx_close_drawer 68.0 70.5 70.0 73.5 

widowx_open_drawer 94.0 94.0 95.5 96.0 

Average 59.9 61.1 61.9 63.6 

Fractal Dataset (Google Robot) Success Rate (%) google_robot_pick_coke_can 97.0 97.5 97.0 98.5 

google_robot_pick_object 85.0 87.0 88.0 89.5 

google_robot_move_near 73.5 74.0 76.0 78.5 

google_robot_open_drawer 44.0 45.0 48.5 51.0 

google_robot_close_drawer 82.5 87.5 85.0 86.0 Average 76.4 78.2 78.9 80.7 

## F Limitation & Future Works 

First, although D REAM AVOID strictly limits dense computations to sparse critical phases, generating high-fidelity future videos and scoring multiple candidate actions still introduces latency. For high-precision but slower-paced manipulation tasks, this overhead is acceptable. However, in highly dynamic environments requiring split-second reactive control, this latency may hinder the robotŌĆÖs 18 Figure 7: On the google_robot_pick_coke_can task of the SimplerEnv benchmark, future videos are generated by DreamDojo based on 4 action chunk candidates produced by GR00T-N1.6 via SDE sampling (13 frames in total; frames 0, 3, 6, 9, and 12 are shown here). Among these, (4) has the highest corresponding value score. smooth execution. In addition to employing various video generation acceleration techniques, future research could also perform forward consequence simulation within a compact latent space. It must be emphasized, however, that explicitly generating pixel-level videos holds irreplaceable value: its intuitive interpretability not only enables human researchers to quickly diagnose and optimize the model, but these synthesized failure scenarios and corrective trajectories can also directly serve as high-quality negative samples or preference data for the continuous fine-tuning of subsequent VLA or world models (e.g., via DPO or RLHF). Secondly, although this paper primarily uses DREAM AVOID as an enhancement module for VLA models, its core test-time dreaming mechanism is architecturally completely independent of the underlying base policy. Future work could integrate this failure-aware framework as a plug-and-play test-time safety layer into broader embodied control architectures, such as the emerging World Action Models or more traditional control policies. For specific implementations, only adaptive modifications to the action sampling methods of different architectures are required: for instance, SDE sampling can be adopted for action trajectory search in flow matching-based policies, while diverse candidate actions can be generated by injecting Gaussian perturbations in diffusion-based models. 

## G Broader Impacts 

Our proposed D REAM AVOID framework enhances the safety and robustness of embodied AI systems. By proactively predicting and avoiding failures at critical phases, this method reduces the risk of physical collisions and damage to robotic arms and objects, paving the way for safe interactions in domestic and industrial environments. However, there are also potential negative impacts to consider. The improved reliability and autonomy of robotic systems may accelerate the displacement of human labor in certain manual tasks. Furthermore, robots might execute unexpected or unsafe actions in out-of-distribution scenarios. Therefore, appropriate human supervision remains crucial. 19