Title: Shaping Zero-Shot Coordination via State Blocking

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.11688v1

Published Time: Wed, 13 May 2026 00:50:53 GMT

Number of Pages: 35

Markdown Content:
# Shaping Zero-Shot Coordination via State Blocking 

Mingu Kang ∗ Sunwoo Lee ∗ Yonghyeon Jo Seungyul Han †

Graduate School of Artificial Intelligence UNIST Ulsan, South Korea 44919 

{mingukang,sunwoolee,yonghyeonjo,syhan}@unist.ac.kr 

## Abstract 

Zero-shot coordination (ZSC) aims to enable agents to cooperate with indepen-dently trained partners without prior interaction, a key requirement for real-world multi-agent systems and human-AI collaboration. Existing approaches have largely emphasized increasing partner diversity during training, yet such strategies often fall short of achieving reliable generalization to unseen partners. We introduce State-Blocked Coordination (SBC), a simple yet effective framework that improves ZSC by inducing diverse interaction scenarios without direct environment mod-ification. Specifically, SBC generates a family of virtual environments through state blocking, allowing agents to experience a wide range of suboptimal partner policies. Across multiple benchmarks, SBC demonstrates superior performance in zero-shot coordination, including strong generalization to human partners. 

## 1 Introduction 

As multi-agent systems rapidly evolve, research has moved beyond coordination among co-trained agents toward interaction with independently trained partners, including humans. Such capabilities are critical for real-world applications, such as assistive robotics [ 1 , 2 ] and autonomous systems [ 3, 4]. A key challenge in these settings is that agents must coordinate with diverse and often suboptimal human behaviors, while large-scale human interaction data remains costly and difficult to collect. This challenge has motivated Zero-Shot Coordination (ZSC) [ 5, 6], where an ego agent is trained to coordinate with independently trained partner agents without requiring access to human data. Early ZSC methods build on Self-Play (SP) [ 7, 8], where agents learn by interacting with copies of themselves. While effective in fully cooperative settings, SP often converges to a single coordination convention, resulting in poor generalization when the ego agent is paired with independently trained partners. To mitigate this limitation, prior work has explored approaches such as Other-Play [ 5], which promotes symmetry-aware coordination, as well as methods that increase partner diversity through populations or randomized policies [ 9 , 6 , 10 , 11 ]. However, these approaches remain limited in capturing a diverse set of structured suboptimal coordination modes, often yielding either similar behaviors or unstructured variability. More recently, environment-diversity approaches [ 12 ] attempt to address this by training agents across varied environments, showing that robustness to environmental changes can improve generalization to unseen partners. However, such methods typically require explicit environment access, introducing additional assumptions. As a result, existing ZSC methods still face a fundamental challenge: constructing diverse yet structured suboptimal partner behaviors that enable robust generalization to unseen partners. Figure 1 illustrates this challenge in Multi-Destination Spread, where four agents must coordinate to reach distinct destinations for success. The upper row shows that SP-trained policies exhibit variation              

> ∗Equal contribution.
> †Corresponding author: Seungyul Han. Preprint.
> arXiv:2605.11688v1 [cs.LG] 12 May 2026 Cross -Play Mismatch Self -Play
> Ego :seed 1
> Partners : seed 2
> Seed 1Seed 2Ego : seed 2
> Partners : seed 1
> State -Blocked Coordination

⋯ ⋯                  

> 𝜋 𝑒 Ego :𝜋 𝑒
> Partners : seed 2
> Ego :𝜋 𝑒
> Partners : seed 1 Partner policy 1 Partner policy 2Partner policy 3
> Partner agents Penalty state ()Ego experience Goal Ego agent
> Cross -Play (ours) Penalty state 1 Penalty state 2 Penalty state 3

Figure 1: Illustration of State-Blocked Coordination in Multi-Destination Spread. Top: Independently trained self-play policies may adopt incompatible conventions across seeds, causing failures in cross-play. Bottom: SBC creates virtual environmental variations through state blocking, inducing diverse suboptimal partner policies. Training the ego policy with these partners improves coordination with unseen partners following different conventions. across random seeds, yet remain tied to similar coordination conventions, leading to failures in cross-play when independently trained agents are paired together. This mismatch highlights a key limitation of existing ZSC approaches: while they introduce some variability, they fail to produce sufficiently distinct coordination modes, resulting in limited coverage of meaningful suboptimal strategies and poor generalization to unseen partners. Consequently, a central question arises: how can we systematically expose the ego agent to a diverse set of structured suboptimal strategies without requiring explicit access to or modification of the environment? To address this limitation, we propose State-Blocked Coordination (SBC) , a framework that induces structured diversity in partner behaviors through state blocking. Specifically, SBC assigns partners a designated penalty state to avoid, effectively creating a family of virtual environments without directly modifying the underlying environment. As each partner must still complete the task while avoiding its assigned state, this induces distinct, locally optimal coordination strategies corresponding to structured suboptimal behaviors. Figure 1 (bottom row) illustrates this effect: partners trained with different penalty states commit to different goal-reaching strategies, resulting in clearly separated coordination modes. By training the ego policy with these partners, SBC enables the ego to coordinate robustly across diverse partner conventions, leading to successful cross-play even with previously unseen partners. Beyond this illustrative example, we show that SBC consistently improves zero-shot coordination performance across multiple benchmarks, including Multi-Destination Spread and Overcooked v1, and enables effective coordination with human partners. 

## 2 Related Work 

Zero-shot coordination methods. Zero-shot coordination (ZSC) trains cooperative agents that generalize to partners with independently formed conventions, and prior work mainly differs in how diversity is introduced during training. One line of work extends self-play to mitigate dependence on a single coordination convention, including symmetry-based approaches such as Other-Play [ 5], equivariant architectures [ 13 ], belief-based reasoning [ 14 , 15 ], and formal analyses of convention-free coordination [ 16 ]. Another line focuses on exposing the ego agent to diverse partner behaviors through populations of independently trained policies or randomized mixtures that approximate such diversity [ 6, 9, 10 , 17 , 11 ]. Generative approaches further model a latent space of partner strategies and sample from it during training [ 18 , 19 , 20 ]. Finally, environmental diversity can be introduced by exposing agents to a broader set of environments, thereby eliciting different partner behaviors [ 12 ]. 

Human–AI coordination. Human–AI coordination has been studied across real-world and sim-ulated environments. In real-world settings, prior work considers domains such as human–robot collaboration [ 2, 1 ], shared autonomy [ 21 ], and interactive driving [ 4]. Complementary work evalu-ates coordination in cooperative games where human data can be collected at scale, most notably Hanabi [ 22 ] and Overcooked [ 23 ], with additional testbeds in social perception [ 24 ]. A related line of 2work considers ad-hoc teamwork [25 , 26 , 27 , 28 , 29 ], where the ego agent is exposed to a broader pool of partner policies, including those not encountered during training, to improve robustness to unseen teammates. In contrast, we focus on zero-shot coordination in which partner behaviors arise from the same training process, without access to externally provided or arbitrary partner policies. 

Reward design across RL domains. Modifying the reward signal to steer learning has a long history in RL, with methods differing by intent. One use is in exploration, where potential-based shaping [ 30 , 31 , 32 ], count-based bonuses [ 33 , 34 , 35 ], and prediction-error curiosity [ 36 , 37 , 38 ]introduce dense or novelty-driven signals to encourage state visitation. A line of work focuses on safety and constraint satisfaction, where negative rewards are applied at unsafe states to enforce constrained-MDP feasibility [ 39 , 40 ], typically through trust-region methods [ 41 , 42 ] or adaptive Lagrangian penalties [ 43 , 44 ]. In offline learning, conservative value penalties [ 45 , 46 ] and uncertainty-based reward penalties [ 47 , 48 ] are used to discourage policies from drifting into out-of-distribution or uncertain regions. Our work adopts a similar state-dependent penalty mechanism, but uses it to steer partners toward different coordination modes rather than to enforce safety or conservatism. 

## 3 Background 

Fully cooperative Markov Decision Process. We consider a fully cooperative Markov decision process (MDP) [ 49 ] defined by the tuple M = ⟨N , S, A, T , R, γ ⟩, where N = {1, . . . , n } denotes the set of agents, S the state space, and A the shared action space. The transition function is 

T : S × A n × S → [0 , 1] , and the shared reward function is R : S × A n × S → R. At each time step t, each agent i selects an action ait according to its policy πi, inducing a joint action 

at = ( a1 

> t

, . . . , a nt ) under the joint policy π(·| st) = Qni=1 πi(·| st). The environment transitions as 

st+1 ∼ T (·| st, at) and all agents receive a shared reward rt = R(st, at, s t+1 ). The objective is to maximize the expected discounted return JM(π) = E[P∞ 

> t=0

γtrt].

Zero-shot coordination protocol. In zero-shot coordination, we consider a joint policy π =(πe, πp) consisting of an ego policy πe and partner policies πp, where πe is optimized during training and evaluated at test time. We evaluate πe under AI–AI and human–AI settings. In AI–AI evaluation, 

self-play (SP) pairs πe with copies of itself, measuring coordination under a shared convention, while cross-play (XP) pairs πe with independently trained partners from different random seeds of the same method, evaluating generalization across seed-induced conventions. Held-out XP further evaluates generalization by pairing πe with partners trained using different ZSC methods. In human– AI evaluation, πe is paired with human proxies learned from demonstrations or, when available, with real human partners. 

## 4 Methods 

4.1 State-Blocked MDP for Structured Partner Diversity 

In this section, we present the formulation of State-Blocked Coordination (SBC), which induces structured partner diversity by creating environmental variations through state blocking. As illustrated in Figure 1, our key idea is to generate diverse partner behaviors by learning policies that avoid designated states, thereby inducing different suboptimal coordination modes. Specifically, we consider a penalty-state set ˜S = {˜s1, ˜s2, . . . , ˜sK } ⊂ D , where D denotes states collected during learning and K is the maximum size of the set. We then construct environmental variations by treating these states as blocked states and penalizing policies that visit them, which leads to the following State-Blocked MDP (SB-MDP). 

Definition 4.1 (State-Blocked Markov Decision Process) . Given a cooperative MDP M and penalty-state set ˜S, we define a State-Blocked MDP as M ˜S = ⟨N , S, A, T , ˜R, γ, α ⟩, where the penalized reward is 

˜R(st, at, s t+1 ; ˜S) := R(st, at, s t+1 ) − αI(st+1 ∈ ˜S), (1) 

with penalty coefficient α ≥ 0. When K = 0 , the formulation recovers the original MDP M.

Under the SB-MDP, visiting penalty states incurs additional penalties, encouraging policies to avoid those states and inducing locally optimal yet potentially suboptimal behaviors. As a result, the 3SB-MDP objective provides a lower bound on the original MDP objective: 

JM ˜S (π) ≤ JM(π),

since ˜R(st, at, s t+1 ) ≤ R (st, at, s t+1 ) for all transitions. A key consequence is that changing the penalty-state set ˜S induces different SB-MDPs M ˜S , each giving rise to distinct coordination modes. Thus, varying only the penalty-state set enables the construction of diverse suboptimal partner policies, which our ego policy can subsequently learn to coordinate with. 

Practical reward design. While Definition 4.1 assigns penalties only when visiting states exactly in ˜S, in practice a smoother reward design is often preferable. We therefore consider a distance-based penalty formulation for SB-MDP, 

˜R(st, at, s t+1 ; ˜S) = R(st, at, s t+1 ) − α X 

> ˜s∈˜S

1

∥st+1 − ˜s∥2 + ϵ , (2) where ϵ > 0 is a small constant for numerical stability. Under this design, states closer to penalty states incur larger penalties, yielding smoother optimization while admitting a similar proof intuition. 

4.2 State-Blocked Coordination through Blocking-aware Partner Exposure 

We now describe the training procedure of State-Blocked Coordination (SBC), whose goal is to expose the ego policy to diverse partner behaviors induced by different state-blocked MDPs. Since changing the penalty-state set ˜S changes the optimal policy in the corresponding SB-MDP M ˜S ,the policy must be aware of which states are blocked to solve the state-blocked task. We therefore introduce a blocking-aware joint policy ˜π = (˜ πe(·| st, ˜S), ˜πp(·| st, ˜S)) , where the blocking-aware policies condition on the penalty-state set ˜S ∼ D , with D the replay buffer collected during training. The blocking-aware policy is trained in the SB-MDP by maximizing the penalized return 

JM ˜S (˜ πe) = E∼(˜ πe, ˜πp)

" ∞X

> t=0

γt ˜rt

#

, (3) where ˜πp is instantiated as copies of ˜πe under self-play. By sampling diverse penalty-state sets during training, SBC induces a family of blocking-aware policies solving different SB-MDPs, thereby producing structured suboptimal partner behaviors. The second stage trains the normal ego policy πe in the original MDP M by exposing it to both self-play and blocking-aware partners, without providing penalty-state information as input. Let 

π = ( πe, πp) denote the normal joint policy. We optimize 

JM(πe) = Eπ′∼Unif {πp, ˜πp}, ˜S∼D 

"

E∼(πe,π′)

" ∞X

> t=0

γtrt

## 

, (4) which trains πe to coordinate with a broader set of structured partner behaviors rather than overfitting to a single self-play convention. Here, πp is also instantiated as copies of πe, and ˜πe and πe are trained with equal iteration ratios. Importantly, while ˜πe serves only to induce diverse partner behaviors during training, the normal ego policy πe is learned in the original MDP and solely used for all test-time evaluations. 

4.3 Value-Guided Penalty-State Scheduling 

A key component of SBC is how to select penalty states for constructing SB-MDPs, since different penalty states induce different blocking-aware partner policies. While uniform sampling maximizes diversity, blindly blocking task-essential states can induce overly degraded partner behaviors and harm the ego policy trained to coordinate with them. To address this, we propose value-guided penalty-state scheduling , which biases sampling away from overly critical states. Let V π (st) denote the value under the original MDP and ˜V ˜π (st, ˜S) the value under an SB-MDP. We quantify the criticality of a penalty state ˜s through the value gap 

∆V (˜ s) := V π (s0) − ˜V ˜π (s0, ˜s), (5) 4(a) Value -gap: 0.93  (b) Value -gap: 0.08                    

> State ǁ𝑠 1(∆𝑉 ǁ𝑠 1=0.93 )
> Critical
> State ǁ𝑠 2(∆𝑉 ǁ𝑠 2=0.08 )Timestep (M )
> Ratio
> 𝑃 ǁ𝑠 2/𝑃 ෥𝑠 1

Figure 2: Visualization of value-guided penalty-state scheduling in Overcooked. Left: ˜s1 is a task-essential state, such as picking up a plate or ingredient, whose blocking induces a large value gap, whereas ˜s2 is a less critical state with a smaller value gap. Right: sampling ratio under the proposed scheduling, which are initially uniform but progressively down-weight ˜s1 over training. Penalty state 

Original MDP  𝓜  SB -MDP  𝓜 ෩𝓢          

> Self -play
> partner 𝝅 𝑝
> Normal ego
> 𝜋 𝑒
> Blocking -aware
> ego ෤𝜋 𝒆
> Penalized
> Reward
> Penalty -state scheduling
> 𝑷 ǁ𝑠
> ⋯
> Blocking -aware
> partner ෥𝝅 𝒑
> ǁ
> 𝑠 ∼𝒟
> Penalty state

Figure 3: Overview of the proposed SBC framework. Value-guided scheduling selects penalty states to construct SB-MDPs for learning blocking-aware policies, while the normal ego policy is trained in the original MDP through exposure to both self-play and blocking-aware partners. where larger ∆V (˜ s) indicates a more task-essential state. We then sample penalty states according to 

P (˜ s) ∝ exp( −β∆V (˜ s)) , (6) so states causing large value degradation are sampled less frequently. The temperature β is annealed from 0 to 1, yielding nearly uniform sampling early in training for diversity, and progressively shifting toward safer penalty states. We construct ˜S by sampling up to K states from the replay buffer D

according to P (˜ s), with the set size uniformly drawn from {1, . . . , K }. Figure 2 illustrates this intuition in Overcooked, where task-essential states induce larger value gaps and are progressively down-weighted over training. Thus, the scheduler initially explores diverse blocking configurations while gradually avoiding overly disruptive ones. To improve partner adaptation and diversity, we additionally employ partner-action prediction and random action injection following [ 11 ]. Figure 3 summarizes the full SBC pipeline, and Algorithm 1 provides the complete training procedure. In our implementation, both blocking-aware and nor-mal policies are optimized using Eqs. (3) and (4) , instantiated with IPPO [ 50 ], where each agent independently updates its own policy. Additional implementation details are deferred to Appendix A. 

Algorithm 1 State-Blocked Coordination (SBC)  

> 1:

Initialize the normal policy π, the blocking-aware policy ˜π, the replay buffer D, and ∆V ← 0 

> 2:

for each training iteration do  

> 3:

Sample a penalty state set ˜S = {˜s1, · · · , ˜sk} from D, where k ∼ Unif(1 , · · · , K ) ▷ Eq. (6)  

> 4:

Construct the SB-MDP M ˜S with the penalized reward ˜R ▷ Eq. (2) 

Blocking-aware policy training  

> 5:

Roll out (˜ πe, ˜πp) in M ˜S 

> 6:

Update the blocking-aware ego policy ˜πe using Eq. (3) 

Normal policy training  

> 7:

Sample a partner policy π′ ∼ Unif {πp, ˜πp} and roll out (πe, π′) in M 

> 8:

Update the normal ego policy πe using Eq. (4)  

> 9:

Update the value gap ∆V and store transitions in D 

> 10:

end for  

> 11:

Return the normal ego policy πe

5Figure 4: Visualization of the evaluation environments. (a) Multi-Destination Spread. (b) Counter Circuit and (c) Coordination Ring in Overcooked v1. 

## 5 Experiments 

5.1 Experimental Setup Environments. In this section, we evaluate SBC on two environments: Multi-Destination Spread 

and Overcooked v1 [ 23 ]. As shown in Figure 4(a), Multi-Destination Spread is a fully observable four-agent cooperative task on a 5 × 5 grid, where agents start from a common central cell and aim to reach four distinct goals. The reward is proportional to the number of agents that reach different goals, with a maximum of 10 when all four agents succeed. Overcooked v1 is a fully observable two-agent cooperative task in which agents collaborate to prepare and deliver dishes, receiving rewards upon every successful task completion. We evaluate on five standard layouts: Counter Circuit ,

Cramped Room , Coordination Ring , Forced Coordination , and Asymmetric Advantages .Figure 4(b) shows example layouts. Detailed task descriptions, state and action spaces, and reward settings are provided in Appendix B. 

ZSC baselines. We compare SBC against a diverse set of ZSC baselines: IPPO [ 50 ], a self-play baseline with independent PPO agents; FCP [ 6], which uses a checkpoint- and seed-based partner population; MEP [ 10 ], which encourages diversity by maximizing behavioral entropy; E3T [11 ], which uses mixtures of random policies as partners; GAMMA [19 ], which samples partners from a VAE-based latent space; and CEC [12 ], which induces partner diversity through procedurally modified layouts. SBC (Ours) trains the ego agent using state-blocked partners. For fair comparison, we follow the official implementations of prior methods. In particular, GAMMA is trained for 100M steps and CEC for 3000M (3B) steps, while the remaining baselines are trained for 30M steps. SBC is also trained for 30M steps, with hyperparameters selected via environment-specific tuning. For ZSC evaluation, each method is trained with 10 random seeds. In the main paper, we report AI–AI performance using SP , XP , and their difference Gap , defined as |SP − XP |. Detailed seed-wise XP heatmaps are provided in Appendix D.1, and additional results on Held-out XP are reported in Appendix D.2. For human–AI evaluation, we report performance with both human proxies and 

real humans . We report the mean and standard deviation across seeds. Detailed descriptions of the baselines and additional experimental details are provided in Appendix C. 

5.2 Performance on Multi-Destination Spread 

Table 1: Episode return on Multi-Destination Spread.                                              

> Method SP XP Gap
> IPPO 990 .0±0.077 .4±7.7912 .6
> FCP 987 .0±2.0236 .3±20 .1750 .7
> MEP 960 .0±4.6127 .6±15 .9832 .4
> GAMMA 942 .5±19 .4146 .1±42 .7796 .4
> E3T 990 .0±0.0130 .8±16 .1859 .2
> SBC 982 .0±7.8957 .2±19 .324 .8

Table 1 reports performance on Multi-Destination Spread. We exclude CEC from comparison, as it requires explicit environ-ment modification to induce diversity. SBC is the only method that achieves strong per-formance in both SP and XP , whereas all other baselines attain high SP performance but fail in XP coordination. This gap arises because, while self-play is relatively easy, the number of valid coordination modes grows factorially ( ∼ 4! ), making generalization across partner policies induced by different random seeds challenging. Consequently, existing ZSC methods fail to cover the full range of coordination modes. In contrast, as illustrated in Figure 1, SBC constructs diverse SB-MDPs via penalty states and trains against the resulting blocking-aware partners, exposing the ego policy to a wide range 6Table 2: Episode return on Overcooked v1. Values are reported as mean ± standard deviation, with 

bold indicating the best results.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

> Counter Circuit Coordination Ring Cramped Room Forced Coordination Method SP XP Gap SP XP Gap SP XP Gap SP XP Gap IPPO 158 ±27 32 ±12 126 287 ±23 41 ±11 246 253 ±9187 ±36 66 200 ±29 10 ±11 190
> FCP 103 ±43 107 ±17 4159 ±29 166 ±11 7224 ±50 227 ±19 3128 ±37 140 ±912
> MEP 87 ±24 83 ±11 4142 ±28 143 ±11 1203 ±17 205 ±7238 ±21 43 ±10 5
> E3T 121 ±31 38 ±983 181 ±58 98 ±24 83 234 ±6165 ±27 69 176 ±10 105 ±22 71
> GAMMA 66 ±29 74 ±14 8143 ±64 142 ±23 1181 ±24 182 ±71108 ±35 129 ±11 21
> CEC 82 ±31 52 ±12 30 203 ±40 175 ±16 28 221 ±21 219 ±19 2112 ±26 81 ±13 31
> SBC 246 ±38 168 ±32 78 333 ±13 316 ±18 17 257 ±5256 ±11193 ±10 160 ±23 33 Self -play partner behaviors
> Blocking -aware partner behaviors
> ǁ
> 𝑠 𝑖 2/Blocking -aware partner 𝑖 2ǁ𝑠 𝑖 3/Blocking -aware partner 𝑖 3ǁ𝑠 𝑖 1/ Blocking -aware partner 𝑖 1

...  ... ...  ...      

> Seed 1 Seed 2 Seed 3
> Ego agent Partner agent Penalty state Agent path

Figure 5: Policy behavior analysis in Overcooked v1. Top: SP partners from different seeds exhibit diverse behaviors. Bottom: Blocking-aware partners induced by diverse penalty states cover this diversity, enabling robust coordination with unseen partners. of structured behaviors. This leads to robust generalization and strong XP performance. Results on held-out XP in Appendix D.2 further confirm that SBC significantly outperforms prior methods. 

5.3 Performance and Analysis on Overcooked v1 

Table 2 reports performance on four diagnostic Overcooked v1 layouts, excluding Asymmetric Advantages , which yields generally high XP performance across methods. Full results including this layout, along with learning curves, are provided in Appendix D.3. Overall, SBC maintains strong performance in both SP and XP across most layouts. Notably, in environments such as Counter Circuit and Coordination Ring , SBC also improves SP performance over prior methods, sug-gesting that exposure to diverse suboptimal partners enhances overall coordination quality. Despite using fewer training samples than GAMMA and CEC, SBC achieves substantial gains while avoid-ing explicit environment modification for inducing partner diversity. Consistent with these results, SBC also achieves the best performance in held-out XP in Appendix D.2, demonstrating robust generalization to unseen partners from other ZSC methods. To better understand these improvements, Figure 5 illustrates how SBC generalizes to diverse partner behaviors induced by SP in Overcooked v1. Under SP (top row), different random seeds lead to a wide range of partner behaviors, as reflected in diverse movement patterns. SBC addresses this variability by constructing SB-MDPs with penalty states that primarily alter agent movement paths while preserving key task-critical states (e.g., ingredients and dishes). This induces diverse blocking patterns that encourage agents to learn alternative coordination strategies by navigating around blocked regions (bottom row). As a result, SBC generates a set of partner behaviors that effectively covers the variations observed under SP, enabling the ego policy to robustly adapt to partners from different seeds and achieve strong XP performance. This provides insight into why SBC achieves 7Variant XP                   

> SBC (Ours) 168 .0±32 .0
> w/o action prediction 141 .7±28 .6
> w/ strict penalty 122 .9±25 .3
> w/ uniform sampling 119 .2±30 .4
> w/o SP partner 68 .6±19 .7
> w/o blocking-aware partner 38 .3±8.5

Table 3: Component ablation. Return     

> SP
> XP
> Return
> (No penalty )(No penalty )

Figure 6: Hyperparameter analysis. (a) Penalty coefficient 

α and (b) maximum size of penalty-state set K.superior performance. Additional trajectory analyses on other Overcooked v1 layouts are provided in Appendix E.1, showing similar trends. 

5.4 Ablation Analysis on Overcooked v1 

In this section, we analyze the impact of key components and hyperparameters of SBC. In the main paper, we focus on results on Counter Circuit , where XP performance differences are most pronounced. Additional results on other environments, along with a comparison of computational cost, which shows that SBC incurs only moderate overhead while remaining substantially more efficient than the considered baselines, are provided in Appendix E. For component ablation, we consider the following variants: SBC (Ours) ; SBC w/o action prediction ,which removes partner action prediction; SBC w/ strict penalty , which applies penalties only upon exact visits as in Eq. (1) ; SBC w/ uniform sampling , which samples penalty states uniformly without value guidance; SBC w/o SP partner ; and SBC w/o blocking-aware partner , which trains the ego policy with only one type of partner. As shown in Table 3, all components contribute to XP performance. Removing action prediction leads to only minor degradation, while strict penalties and uniform sampling significantly degrade performance, highlighting the importance of distance-based penalties and value-guided state sampling. Moreover, both SP and blocking-aware partners are essential, and removing either results in substantial performance drops. We further analyze the effect of key hyperparameters in Figure 6, focusing on (a) the penalty coefficient α and (b) the maximum penalty-state set size K. We evaluate α ∈ { 0, 0.05 , 0.1, 0.5}

and K ∈ { 0, 1, 2, 3, 4}. When α = 0 , state blocking is disabled, resulting in the worst performance. A moderate value ( α = 0 .1) achieves the best balance, while overly small or large values degrade performance due to insufficient or excessive penalization. Similarly, K = 0 (no penalty) yields the lowest performance, and the best results are obtained at K = 1 , whereas larger values degrade performance by overly restricting the state space. Additional ablations across all layouts are provided in Appendix E.3. While K = 1 performs best in most cases, larger values can be beneficial in environments with many optimal coordination modes under SP; for example, Coordination Ring 

achieves the best performance at K = 2 .

5.5 Zero-Shot Human–AI Coordination 

To evaluate the transfer of SBC to human–AI coordination, we conduct experiments in the Overcooked v1 environment using two protocols: human proxies trained on human demonstrations [ 23 ], and real humans under an IRB-approved protocol. In the real-human study, 40 participants played 60-second episodes with ego agents sampled from five random seeds per method. Method identity was kept hidden, and the presentation order was counterbalanced. All participants provided informed consent and were compensated for their time. Figure 7 reports scores on Overcooked v1 normalized by each layout’s IPPO SP score, where human–AI scores are generally lower than AI–AI scores due to variation in participants’ Overcooked experience. Overall, SBC achieves the highest performance on all five layouts under both protocols, whereas prior methods perform well only on specific layouts. These results show that exposure to diverse suboptimal blocking-aware partners is also effective for human–AI coordination, enabling SBC to coordinate robustly with human partners. We further use real-human episodes to compute two behavioral metrics, averaged across the five Overcooked v1 layouts. Collisions quantify the number of collisions between the AI and human agents per delivery, serving as an objective measure of coordination failure. Coordination fluency is 8Component ablation 

> XP
> Reward

𝛼  ablation 

𝛼 

> Reward

𝐾  ablation 

𝐾 = ሚ𝒮 

> Forced Coord.
> Cramped
> Room
> Counter
> Circuit
> Asymm. Advantages
> Coord.
> Ring
> SBC (Ours)
> CEC
> GAMMA
> E3T
> MEP
> FCP
> IPPO
> Forced Coord.
> Cramped
> Room
> Counter
> Circuit
> Coord.
> Ring
> Asymm. Advantages

Figure 7: Human–AI evaluation on Overcooked v1 with scores normalized by each layout’s IPPO SP score. (a) Evaluation with human proxies. (b) Evaluation with real humans ( p-value < 0.001 ). SBC (Ours)  CEC  GAMMA  E3T  MEP  FCP  IPPO 

> Rating
> Value

Figure 8: Human–AI behavioral analysis on Overcooked v1, averaged over five layouts (Wilcoxon signed-rank, p-value < 0.01 ). (a) Collisions per delivery (lower is better). (b) Participant-rated coordination fluency on a 7-point Likert scale (higher is better). assessed via a post-episode 7-point Likert scale (1 = very poor, 7 = very good), capturing participants’ perceived smoothness of collaboration. Figure 8(a) shows that SBC achieves the lowest number of collisions per delivery, outperforming all baselines, which reflects efficient coordination by accounting for both task completion and physical conflicts. In addition, Figure 8(b) shows that SBC receives the highest ratings on the 7-point Likert scale. Together, these results indicate that SBC not only improves episode return but also flexibly adapts its coordination convention to diverse human behaviors, reducing physical conflicts and enabling smoother, more human-compatible collaboration. 

## 6 Limitations 

Despite the strong performance of SBC, it introduces two additional hyperparameters, the penalty coefficient α and the maximum size of the penalty-state set K, which require tuning. Nevertheless, SBC consistently provides substantial performance gains, and a good configuration can be found with moderate variation, as supported by our hyperparameter analysis. As the number of agents increases, the number of possible coordination conventions may also grow, leaving the use of larger values of K

in more complex multi-agent settings as a direction for future work. In addition, computing the value gap introduces extra computational cost; however, as shown in Appendix E.4, this overhead remains modest compared to IPPO and is reasonable given the improved efficiency over other ZSC methods. 

## 7 Conclusion 

We introduced State-Blocked Coordination (SBC), a framework for zero-shot coordination that generates structured partner diversity by penalizing designated states. Unlike prior approaches that rely on population-level diversity or environment modification, SBC creates a family of blocking-aware partners that adopt distinct coordination modes, exposing the ego agent to broad coverage of meaningful locally optimal behaviors. Experiments on Multi-Destination Spread and Overcooked v1 demonstrate that SBC achieves the highest cross-play performance while maintaining strong self-play scores. Human–AI evaluations show that SBC successfully coordinates with unseen human partners. 9References 

[1] Michelle Zhao, Reid Simmons, and Henny Admoni. Coordination with humans via strategy matching. In 2022 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) , pages 9116–9123. IEEE, 2022. [2] Shufei Li, Pai Zheng, Sichao Liu, Zuoxu Wang, Xi Vincent Wang, Lianyu Zheng, and Lihui Wang. Proactive human–robot collaboration: Mutual-cognitive, predictable, and self-organising perspectives. Robotics and Computer-Integrated Manufacturing , 81:102510, 2023. [3] Yi Zhang, Ping Sun, Yuhan Yin, Lin Lin, and Xuesong Wang. Human-like autonomous vehicle speed control by deep reinforcement learning with double q-learning. In 2018 IEEE intelligent vehicles symposium (IV) , pages 1251–1256. IEEE, 2018. [4] Daphne Cornelisse and Eugene Vinitsky. Human-compatible driving partners through data-regularized self-play reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.19648 , 2024. [5] Hengyuan Hu, Adam Lerer, Alex Peysakhovich, and Jakob Foerster. “other-play” for zero-shot coordination. In International conference on machine learning , pages 4399–4410. PMLR, 2020. [6] DJ Strouse, Kevin McKee, Matt Botvinick, Edward Hughes, and Richard Everett. Collaborating with humans without human data. Advances in neural information processing systems , 34:14502– 14515, 2021. [7] Arthur L Samuel. Some studies in machine learning using the game of checkers. IBM Journal of research and development , 3(3):210–229, 1959. [8] David Silver, Thomas Hubert, Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Matthew Lai, Arthur Guez, Marc Lanctot, Laurent Sifre, Dharshan Kumaran, Thore Graepel, et al. A general reinforcement learning algorithm that masters chess, shogi, and go through self-play. Science ,362(6419):1140–1144, 2018. [9] Andrei Lupu, Brandon Cui, Hengyuan Hu, and Jakob Foerster. Trajectory diversity for zero-shot coordination. In International conference on machine learning , pages 7204–7213. PMLR, 2021. [10] Rui Zhao, Jinming Song, Yufeng Yuan, Haifeng Hu, Yang Gao, Yi Wu, Zhongqian Sun, and Wei Yang. Maximum entropy population-based training for zero-shot human-ai coordination. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , volume 37, pages 6145–6153, 2023. [11] Xue Yan, Jiaxian Guo, Xingzhou Lou, Jun Wang, Haifeng Zhang, and Yali Du. An efficient end-to-end training approach for zero-shot human-ai coordination. Advances in neural information processing systems , 36:2636–2658, 2023. [12] Kunal Jha, Wilka Carvalho, Yancheng Liang, Simon S Du, Max Kleiman-Weiner, and Natasha Jaques. Cross-environment cooperation enables zero-shot multi-agent coordination. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.12714 , 2025. [13] Darius Muglich, Christian Schroeder de Witt, Elise van der Pol, Shimon Whiteson, and Jakob Foerster. Equivariant networks for zero-shot coordination. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 35:6410–6423, 2022. [14] Hengyuan Hu, Adam Lerer, Brandon Cui, Luis Pineda, Noam Brown, and Jakob Foerster. Off-belief learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 4369–4379. PMLR, 2021. [15] Brandon Cui, Hengyuan Hu, Luis Pineda, and Jakob Foerster. K-level reasoning for zero-shot coordination in hanabi. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 34:8215–8228, 2021. [16] Johannes Treutlein, Michael Dennis, Caspar Oesterheld, and Jakob Foerster. A new formalism, method and open issues for zero-shot coordination. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 10413–10423. PMLR, 2021. 10 [17] Keane Lucas and Ross E Allen. Any-play: An intrinsic augmentation for zero-shot coordination. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.12436 , 2022. [18] Kenneth Derek and Phillip Isola. Adaptable agent populations via a generative model of policies. 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 34:3902–3913, 2021. [19] Yancheng Liang, Daphne Chen, Abhishek Gupta, Simon S Du, and Natasha Jaques. Learning to cooperate with humans using generative agents. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 37:60061–60087, 2024. [20] Benjamin Li, Shuyang Shi, Lucia Romero, Huao Li, Yaqi Xie, Woojun Kim, Stefanos Nikolaidis, Michael Lewis, Katia Sycara, and Simon Stepputtis. Adaptively coordinating with novel partners via learned latent strategies. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.12754 , 2025. [21] Dylan P Losey, Krishnan Srinivasan, Ajay Mandlekar, Animesh Garg, and Dorsa Sadigh. Controlling assistive robots with learned latent actions. In 2020 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , pages 378–384. IEEE, 2020. [22] Nolan Bard, Jakob N Foerster, Sarath Chandar, Neil Burch, Marc Lanctot, H Francis Song, Emilio Parisotto, Vincent Dumoulin, Subhodeep Moitra, Edward Hughes, et al. The hanabi challenge: A new frontier for ai research. Artificial Intelligence , 280:103216, 2020. [23] Micah Carroll, Rohin Shah, Mark K Ho, Tom Griffiths, Sanjit Seshia, Pieter Abbeel, and Anca Dragan. On the utility of learning about humans for human-ai coordination. Advances in neural information processing systems , 32, 2019. [24] Xavier Puig, Tianmin Shu, Shuang Li, Zilin Wang, Yuan-Hong Liao, Joshua B Tenenbaum, Sanja Fidler, and Antonio Torralba. Watch-and-help: A challenge for social perception and human-ai collaboration. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.09890 , 2020. [25] Peter Stone, Gal Kaminka, Sarit Kraus, and Jeffrey Rosenschein. Ad hoc autonomous agent teams: Collaboration without pre-coordination. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence , volume 24, pages 1504–1509, 2010. [26] Samuel Barrett and Peter Stone. Cooperating with unknown teammates in complex domains: A robot soccer case study of ad hoc teamwork. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , volume 29, 2015. [27] Shuo Chen, Ewa Andrejczuk, Zhiguang Cao, and Jie Zhang. Aateam: Achieving the ad hoc teamwork by employing the attention mechanism. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence , volume 34, pages 7095–7102, 2020. [28] Muhammad A Rahman, Niklas Hopner, Filippos Christianos, and Stefano V Albrecht. Towards open ad hoc teamwork using graph-based policy learning. In International conference on machine learning , pages 8776–8786. PMLR, 2021. [29] Caroline Wang, Arrasy Rahman, Ishan Durugkar, Elad Liebman, and Peter Stone. N-agent ad hoc teamwork. In Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , pages 111832–111862, 2024. [30] Andrew Y Ng, Daishi Harada, and Stuart Russell. Policy invariance under reward transforma-tions: Theory and application to reward shaping. In Icml , volume 99, pages 278–287. Citeseer, 1999. [31] Eric Wiewiora, Garrison W Cottrell, and Charles Elkan. Principled methods for advising reinforcement learning agents. In Proceedings of the 20th international conference on machine learning (ICML-03) , pages 792–799, 2003. [32] Sam Michael Devlin and Daniel Kudenko. Dynamic potential-based reward shaping. In 11th International Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems (AAMAS 2012) , pages 433–440. IFAAMAS, 2012. [33] Marc Bellemare, Sriram Srinivasan, Georg Ostrovski, Tom Schaul, David Saxton, and Remi Munos. Unifying count-based exploration and intrinsic motivation. Advances in neural information processing systems , 29, 2016. 11 [34] Haoran Tang, Rein Houthooft, Davis Foote, Adam Stooke, OpenAI Xi Chen, Yan Duan, John Schulman, Filip DeTurck, and Pieter Abbeel. # exploration: A study of count-based exploration for deep reinforcement learning. Advances in neural information processing systems , 30, 2017. [35] Georg Ostrovski, Marc G Bellemare, Aäron Oord, and Rémi Munos. Count-based exploration with neural density models. In International conference on machine learning , pages 2721–2730. PMLR, 2017. [36] Deepak Pathak, Pulkit Agrawal, Alexei A Efros, and Trevor Darrell. Curiosity-driven exploration by self-supervised prediction. In International conference on machine learning , pages 2778– 2787. PMLR, 2017. [37] Yuri Burda, Harrison Edwards, Amos Storkey, and Oleg Klimov. Exploration by random network distillation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.12894 , 2018. [38] Yuri Burda, Harri Edwards, Deepak Pathak, Amos Storkey, Trevor Darrell, and Alexei A Efros. Large-scale study of curiosity-driven learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1808.04355 , 2018. [39] Eitan Altman. Constrained Markov decision processes . Routledge, 2021. [40] Alex Ray, Joshua Achiam, and Dario Amodei. Benchmarking safe exploration in deep rein-forcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.01708 , 7(1):2, 2019. [41] Joshua Achiam, David Held, Aviv Tamar, and Pieter Abbeel. Constrained policy optimization. In International conference on machine learning , pages 22–31. Pmlr, 2017. [42] Tsung-Yen Yang, Justinian Rosca, Karthik Narasimhan, and Peter J Ramadge. Projection-based constrained policy optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.03152 , 2020. [43] Chen Tessler, Daniel J Mankowitz, and Shie Mannor. Reward constrained policy optimization. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:1805.11074 , 2018. [44] Adam Stooke, Joshua Achiam, and Pieter Abbeel. Responsive safety in reinforcement learning by pid lagrangian methods. In International conference on machine learning , pages 9133–9143. PMLR, 2020. [45] Aviral Kumar, Aurick Zhou, George Tucker, and Sergey Levine. Conservative q-learning for offline reinforcement learning. Advances in neural information processing systems , 33:1179– 1191, 2020. [46] Scott Fujimoto, David Meger, and Doina Precup. Off-policy deep reinforcement learning without exploration. In International conference on machine learning , pages 2052–2062. PMLR, 2019. [47] Tianhe Yu, Garrett Thomas, Lantao Yu, Stefano Ermon, James Y Zou, Sergey Levine, Chelsea Finn, and Tengyu Ma. Mopo: Model-based offline policy optimization. Advances in neural information processing systems , 33:14129–14142, 2020. [48] Rahul Kidambi, Aravind Rajeswaran, Praneeth Netrapalli, and Thorsten Joachims. Morel: Model-based offline reinforcement learning. Advances in neural information processing systems ,33:21810–21823, 2020. [49] Michael L Littman. Markov games as a framework for multi-agent reinforcement learning. In 

Machine learning proceedings 1994 , pages 157–163. Elsevier, 1994. [50] Christian Schroeder De Witt, Tarun Gupta, Denys Makoviichuk, Viktor Makoviychuk, Philip HS Torr, Mingfei Sun, and Shimon Whiteson. Is independent learning all you need in the starcraft multi-agent challenge? arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.09533 , 2020. [51] Alexander Rutherford, Benjamin Ellis, Matteo Gallici, Jonathan Cook, Andrei Lupu, Garðar Ingvarsson, Timon Willi, Ravi Hammond, Akbir Khan, Christian Schroeder de Witt, Alexandra Souly, Saptarashmi Bandyopadhyay, Mikayel Samvelyan, Minqi Jiang, Robert Tjarko Lange, Shimon Whiteson, Bruno Lacerda, Nick Hawes, Tim Rocktäschel, Chris Lu, and Jakob Nicolaus Foerster. Jaxmarl: Multi-agent rl environments and algorithms in jax. In The Thirty-eight Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track , 2024. 12 A Implementation Details 

This section provides additional implementation details of SBC. We first describe penalty-state set construction, then present the RL training implementation used to optimize the ego and blocking-aware policies, along with additional training components such as partner-action prediction and random action injection. 

Penalty-state set construction. We compute the value gap for replay-buffer states using Eq. (5) and construct an episode-level penalty-state set by sampling up to K states according to Eq. (6) . The sampled penalty states are concatenated with the original state and used as inputs to the blocking-aware policy and value function in the SB-MDP. Since the input reserves K penalty-state slots, unused slots are padded with the dummy value −1. In Overcooked, penalty states are represented by the CNN-encoded state features, matching the representation used by the policy. 

SBC Training Details. We optimize both the blocking-aware ego policy ˜πe and the normal ego policy πe using Independent PPO (IPPO) [ 50 ]. The blocking-aware policies are trained in the SB-MDP M ˜S with the penalized reward ˜rt, as in Eq. (3) , while the normal ego policy is trained in the original MDP M with the original reward rt, as in Eq. (4). The value estimates for the blocking-aware and normal objectives are computed by separate critics, 

˜V ˜π 

> ˜θ

and V π 

> θ

, parameterized by ˜θ and θ, respectively. The value losses are 

LSB  

> V

(˜θ) = Et

 ˜V ˜π 

> ˜θ

(st, ˜S) − ˆGt

2

,

LV (θ) = Et

h

(V π 

> θ

(st) − Gt)2i

,

where ˜Gt and Gt are GAE-based return targets computed using the penalized reward ˜rt and the original reward rt, respectively. Both policies are updated with the clipped IPPO objective: 

LIPPO = Et



min 

 ππold 

ˆAt, clip 

 ππold 

, 1 − ε, 1 + ε



ˆAt

 

,

where π denotes either πe or ˜πe, parameterized by ϕ and ˜ϕ, respectively. The advantage ˆAt is computed with the corresponding reward and critic: (rt, V π 

> θ

) for πe and (˜ rt, ˜V ˜π 

> ˜θ

) for ˜πe. Here, ε is the PPO clipping coefficient. 

Additional Training Components. To further improve ZSC generalization, we incorporate partner-action prediction and random action injection into SBC, following E3T [ 11 ]. For partner-action prediction, we add an auxiliary model fpred that predicts the partner joint action from the current state, ˆapt = fpred (· | st). It is trained with a supervised cross-entropy loss over partner actions observed during rollouts: 

Lpred = E [− log fpred (apt | st)] ,

where apt is the partner joint action at time t. The predicted action is concatenated with the ego policy input, yielding πe(aet | st, ˆapt ).For random action injection, let πr be a joint random policy over partner actions and let μ ∈ [0 , 1] be the mixing ratio. We inject random actions into both the normal and blocking-aware partner policies: 

πpμ = (1 − μ)πp + μπr , ˜πpμ = (1 − μ) ˜ πp + μπr .

Thus, partners occasionally follow random actions during both normal ego-policy training and blocking-aware ego-policy training, improving robustness to partner deviations. 13 B Environment Details 

In this section, we provide additional details on the benchmark environments used in our experiments. Specifically, Appendix B.1 introduces Multi-Destination Spread, where the goal is to maximize coverage by having agents reach distinct destinations, whereas Appendix B.2, describes Overcooked v1 [23], which aims to collaboratively complete cooking and delivery tasks. 

B.1 Multi-Destination Spread Agents  Goal 

Figure B.1: Multi-Destination Spread. (a) Four agents spawn at the same central position. (b) Agents succeed by reaching four distinct goals. Multi-Destination Spread is a fully observable cooperative grid-world task with four agents on a 

5 × 5 grid. All agents spawn at the center of the grid, and four goals are placed around the center in different directions. The objective is for the agents to cover four distinct goals at the same time. 

State space. The environment state consists of all agent positions, all fixed goal positions, the current timestep, and the terminal flag. Each agent receives a fully observable vector observation composed of an agent identity one-hot vector and the global state. Specifically, the observation is 

oit = onehot( i), x 1 

> t

, y 1 

> t

, . . . , x 4 

> t

, y 4 

> t

, g 1

> x

, g 1 

> y

, . . . , g 4

> x

, g 4

> y

 ,

which has dimension 20 .

Action space. Each agent has a discrete action space with 9 actions: moving in the eight grid directions or staying in place. If an action would move an agent outside the grid, the position is clipped to remain within the boundary. When multiple agents attempt to occupy the same cell, the colliding agents are reverted to their previous positions. 

Reward function. Agents share a cooperative shaped reward based on the number of distinct goals covered. If all four goals are covered, the environment gives a reward of 10 . If three, two, or one goals are covered, the reward is 5, 2, or 1, respectively; otherwise it is 0. Episodes terminate after a maximum of 100 steps. 14 B.2 Overcooked v1 Goal 

# Agents  Potato  Plate  Serving location 

Figure B.2: Overcooked v1 layouts. (a) Forced Coordination . (b) Cramped Room . (c) 

Coordination Ring . (d) Counter Circuit . (e) Asymmetric Advantages .Overcooked v1 [ 23 ] (MIT License) is a fully observable two-agent cooperative task where agents collaborate in a grid-world kitchen to prepare and deliver dishes. Our implementation follows the Overcooked v1 setup provided by JaxMARL [ 51 ] (Apache License 2.0). Each layout specifies the positions of counters, pots, ingredient dispensers, serving locations, and agent start positions. In our experiments, we evaluate five standard layouts: Counter Circuit , Cramped Room , Coordination Ring , Forced Coordination , and Asymmetric Advantages .

State space. The environment is fully observable, each agent receives a spatial tensor observation of size H × W × 26 , where H and W are the layout height and width, and the 26 channels encode sparse binary features of the kitchen state. These features include the positions and orientations of both agents, object locations and contents such as potatoes, dishes, and soups, and the status of cooking pots. We process this observation with a CNN encoder followed by fully connected layers to obtain a 128-dimensional vector representation used by the policy. 

Action space. Each agent has a discrete action space with 6 actions: moving in the four cardinal directions, interacting, or staying in place. The interaction action allows the agent to pick up or place objects, add potatoes to pots, pick up completed soups, and deliver dishes depending on the agent’s location and held object. 

Reward function. Agents share a cooperative reward of +20 for each successfully delivered soup, matching the standard Overcooked-AI scale. We also use the shaped rewards provided by JaxMARL during training: placing a potato in a pot gives +3 , picking up a plate gives +3 , and picking up a ready soup gives +5 . The distance-based shaping terms for dishes, pots, and soups are set to 0.Episodes are run for a fixed horizon in each layout. 15 C Experimental Details 

All experiments are conducted on a machine with NVIDIA RTX 3090 GPUs and an Intel Xeon Gold 6348 CPU @ 2.60 GHz (28 cores per socket, 2 sockets, 56 physical cores), running Ubuntu 20.04 with JAX (jaxlib). Appendix C.1 provides the hyperparameters used in our experiments, Appendix C.2 describes the ZSC baselines, Appendix C.3 describes the ZSC evaluation protocol, and Appendix C.4 presents the interface used for real-human evaluation. 

C.1 Hyperparameters 

All ZSC baselines and SBC follow the IPPO baseline implementation in JaxMARL [ 51 ]. We use the same common hyperparameter settings as this setup, as summarized in Table C.1. The main baseline-specific hyperparameters are provided in Table C.2. For SBC, the penalty coefficient α and the maximum size of the penalty-state set K are the main hyperparameters. We select the best values for each environment through the ablation study in Appendix E.3. The temperature β used in value-guided penalty-state scheduling is annealed from 0

to 1 during training. The environment-specific SBC hyperparameters are summarized in Table C.3. Table C.1: Common IPPO hyperparameter settings shared across all methods within each environment.                                  

> Hyperparameter Multi-Destination Spread Overcooked v1
> Network architecture MLP (64, 1 layer) + actor/critic heads CNN (32) + GRU (128) + FC (128) Optimizer Adam ( ϵ= 10 −5)Adam ( ϵ= 10 −5)Learning rate (actor / critic) 5×10 −42.5×10 −4
> Discount factor γ0.99 0.99 GAE λ0.95 0.95 PPO clip ε0.2 0.2 Entropy coef. 0.01 0.01 Parallel envs 256 64 Batch size 25,600 16,384 Buffer size 100 256 Update epochs 60 4

Table C.2: Baseline-specific hyperparameter settings.                     

> Method Hyperparameter Value
> FCP Population size 10 SP seeds ×3 checkpoints = 30 partners Checkpoint interval 10M timesteps (ckpt at 10M / 20M / 30M) MEP Population size 4GAMMA VAE latent dim ( z)16 VAE hidden size 256 VAE KL penalty (init →final) 0.01 →1.0 E3T Random-policy mixing ratio ( ϵ)0.3 CEC Number of procedural environments 5 (Overcooked v1 base layouts with IK)

Table C.3: Environment-specific SBC hyperparameter settings.                 

> Environment Layout αK
> Multi-Destination Spread –0.01 1Overcooked v1
> Counter Circuit 0.1 1
> Cramped Room 0.1 1
> Coordination Ring 0.05 2
> Forced Coordination 0.5 1
> Asymmetric Advantages 0.05 1

16 C.2 Other Baselines 

All ZSC baselines use IPPO as the base learner, following the implementation in JaxMARL [51]. 

FCP. Fictitious Co-Play (FCP) [ 6] trains the ego agent against a population of self-play agents and their historical checkpoints. The key idea is to approximate diverse partner conventions by collecting policies from different seeds and different stages of self-play training. The ego policy is trained as a best response to partners sampled from this population: 

JFCP (πe) = Eπp∼P FCP [JM(πe, πp)] ,

where PFCP denotes the partner population. 

MEP. Maximum Entropy Population-based training (MEP) [ 10 ] encourages diversity by training a population of partner policies with an additional population-entropy reward. Let ¯πp(· | st) denote the mean policy of the partner population. MEP trains the partner population by maximizing the task reward together with the entropy of the mean partner policy: 

JMEP (πp) = Eπp

" TX

> t=0

γt (rt + αH ( ¯ πp(· | st))) 

#

,

where α controls the strength of the population-entropy bonus. After training the diverse partner population, the ego agent is trained by sampling partners from this population. 

E3T. Efficient End-to-End Training (E3T) [ 11 ] is a ZSC method that avoids pretraining a large partner population. Instead, it constructs a partner policy by mixing the ego policy with a random policy, combining coordination ability with behavioral diversity. The partner policy is defined as 

πpϵ = (1 − ϵ)πp + ϵπr ,

where πr is a random policy and ϵ is the mixing ratio. E3T also uses partner-action prediction, which feeds the predicted partner action into the ego policy to help it adapt to partners following different conventions. 

GAMMA. Generative Agent Modeling for Multi-agent Adaptation (GAMMA) [ 19 ] learns a generative model of partner behavior. It trains a variational autoencoder (VAE) on trajectory data, where the latent variable captures partner strategy. After training, partners are sampled from the latent space and used to train the ego agent against a broader distribution of generated partner strategies. 

CEC. Cross-Environment Cooperation (CEC) [ 12 ] introduces diversity by modifying the envi-ronment rather than by constructing a partner population. During training, the agent is trained via self-play across a distribution of procedurally generated environments, replacing partner-population diversity with environment diversity. This encourages the agent to learn general coordination rules that transfer to unseen partners and unseen layouts. We follow the official implementation provided by the authors. 3

> 3https://github.com/KJha02/crossEnvCooperation

17 C.3 ZSC Evaluation Protocol 

This section describes the evaluation protocol used to assess the generalization ability of each ZSC method to unseen AI and human partners. We organize the evaluation into two categories: AI–AI evaluation and human–AI evaluation. 

AI–AI evaluation. AI–AI evaluation measures how well an ego policy coordinates with AI partners. We report three metrics: self-play (SP), cross-play (XP), and held-out XP. As explained in Section 5.1, 

Gap , defined as |SP − XP |, measures performance degradation caused by convention mismatch. A smaller gap indicates that the ego policy is less sensitive to partner seed variation. • Self-play (SP). SP evaluates coordination under the same learned convention by pairing an ego policy with partner policies trained from the same random seed. It measures task-solving performance when agents share the same training history. • Cross-play (XP). XP evaluates generalization across independently learned conventions. For each method, we train ego policies with 10 random seeds and pair each ego policy with partner policies trained from different seeds of the same method. We report the average performance over all cross-seed pairings. • Held-out XP. Held-out XP measures whether ego policies can coordinate with partners induced by different ZSC algorithms by testing cross-method pairings. We pair each ego policy with partner policies from the various methods, including IPPO, FCP, MEP, E3T, GAMMA, and SBC. CEC was excluded due to its incompatible observation encoding. 

Human–AI evaluation. Human–AI evaluation measures how well an ego policy coordinates with human-like or real human partners on Overcooked v1 layouts. We consider two protocols: human-proxy evaluation and real-human evaluation. We assess coordination quality using two behavioral metrics, where Collisions measure coordination failures by counting blocked movement attempts per delivery and Coordination fluency captures subjective collaboration quality via participant ratings on a seven-point Likert scale. • Human proxies. Human-proxy evaluation uses a learned proxy partner to approximate human behavior. Following the protocol in Overcooked [ 23 ], we train a partner policy by behavior cloning on human demonstration data. We use the human demonstration data and behavior cloning model provided by the Overcooked-AI codebase. 4 At test time, each ego policy is paired with this behavior-cloned human proxy. This protocol allows us to evaluate whether the ego policy can coordinate with human-like behavior without requiring real-time human participants. • Real humans. Real-human evaluation pairs each ego policy with actual human participants in real time. We conduct a study with 40 participants, following the IRB protocol of our institution. Each participant plays 60-second episodes with ego agents sampled from five random seeds per method. We evaluate seven methods across five Overcooked v1 layouts, resulting in 35 episodes per participant.The method identity is hidden from participants, and the presentation order is counterbalanced across participants. 

> 4https://github.com/HumanCompatibleAI/overcooked_ai

18 C.4 Interface for Real-Human Evaluation 

To conduct the real-human evaluation in Appendix C.3, we developed a custom web-based interface that lets participants play Overcooked v1 in real time with our trained ego agents through a standard browser. Before the main session, each participant is guided through a brief instruction sequence (Figure C.1a), and then plays episodes on the gameplay screen (Figure C.1b). The method identity is hidden and the presentation order is counterbalanced across participants. The interface logs trajectories and collision events for behavioral analysis, and after each episode participants rate the seven-point Likert item “ The AI partner and I coordinated well as a team ” (1–7). 

> (a) Pre-session instructions.
> (b) Gameplay screen.

Figure C.1: Web interface used in the real-human evaluation. (a) Pre-session instructions covering the goal, items, kitchen objects, and controls. (b) The gameplay screen, where the participant (blue, “You”) is paired with an ego agent (orange, “AI”) in a shared kitchen. 19 D Additional Performance Results 

This section provides additional performance comparisons between SBC and ZSC baselines. Ap-pendix D.1 presents seed-wise XP heatmaps for each method. Appendix D.2 reports held-out XP performance not only across different seeds but also across unseen methods. Appendix D.3 provides tables and learning curves for all layouts of Overcooked v1. 

D.1 Seed-wise XP Heatmaps 

This section presents seed-wise XP heatmaps for SBC and the ZSC baselines on Multi-Destination Spread and Overcooked v1. Each heatmap reports the cross-play performance obtained by pairing ego policies and partner policies trained with different random seeds. Rows correspond to ego seeds, columns correspond to partner seeds, and each cell shows the mean episode reward of the corresponding ego–partner pair. 

Multi-Destination Spread. Figure D.1 shows the seed-wise XP performance of SBC on Multi-Destination Spread by pairing ego policies and partner policies trained with 10 different random seeds. The main diagonal entries correspond to SP, where ego and partner policies are trained with the same seed, and achieve nearly the maximum score. The off-diagonal entries correspond to XP, where ego and partner policies are trained with different seeds, and also maintain high rewards. This indicates that ego policies trained with SBC can flexibly coordinate with unseen coordination conventions learned from different random seeds. Ego          

> Partner
> 12345678910
> 10  9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

Figure D.1: Seed-wise XP heatmaps on the Multi-Destination Spread. Rows: ego seeds; Columns: partner seeds. Each cell shows the mean episode return for the corresponding ego–partner seed pair. 20 Overcooked v1. Figure D.2 shows seed-wise XP performance on Coordination Ring and 

Cramped Room by pairing SBC policies trained with different random seeds. Cells on the main diagonal represent same-seed pairings, while off-diagonal cells represent cross-seed pairings. In both layouts, cross-seed XP performance is close to the maximum score across nearly all seed pairs. These results indicate that, by training with diverse locally optimal blocking-aware partners, SBC learns an ego policy that can coordinate well with unseen partners trained from different seeds. Ego          

> Partner
> 12345678910
> 10  9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

(a) Coordination Ring Ego           

> Partner
> 12345678910
> 10  9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

(b) Cramped Room 

Figure D.2: Seed-wise XP heatmaps on Overcooked v1. 21 D.2 Cross-Method Held-out XP 

We evaluate held-out XP on Multi-Destination Spread and Overcooked v1 to test whether each ego policy can coordinate with partners trained by different ZSC methods. Each cell (i, j ) reports the XP score obtained by pairing the ego policy of method i with partner policies of method j, averaged over 10 random seeds. Same-method pairings are computed via seed-wise cross-play to provide a comparable reference, while cross-method pairings evaluate generalization to unseen method-induced partners. The rightmost Mean column reports the row-wise average over cross-method partner columns only (i.e., excluding the diagonal entry (i, i ) to isolate generalization to method-induced partners). 

Multi-Destination Spread. Figure D.3 reports cross-method held-out XP performance on Multi-Destination Spread, where the ego agent is paired with three partners drawn from another method. SBC achieves the highest mean held-out XP. When paired with partners from other methods, SBC often achieves higher scores than those methods’ same-method XP scores, whereas other methods suffer large drops under cross-method pairing. The result suggests that blocking-aware partners induce diverse coordination conventions that cover not only seed-induced conventions but also conventions learned by other ZSC methods. IPPO  FCP  MEP  E3T  GAMMA  SBC  Mean 

> IPPO FCP MEP E3T GAMMA SBC

Figure D.3: Held-out XP heatmap on Multi-Destination Spread. 22 Overcooked v1. Figure D.4 reports cross-method held-out XP performance on all five Overcooked v1 layouts, along with the aggregated mean across layouts in the bottom-right panel. Similar to Multi-Destination Spread, most prior methods show substantial performance drops when paired with partners from different methods compared to their same-method XP. In contrast, SBC maintains high held-out XP across partner methods and often outperforms the same-method XP scores of the corresponding partner methods. These results show that SBC robustly generalizes to unseen partners induced by both different random seeds and different ZSC methods. IPPO  FCP  MEP  E3T  GAMMA  SBC  Mean 

> IPPO FCP MEP E3T GAMMA SBC

Coordination Ring       

> IPPO FCP MEP E3T GAMMA SBC Mean
> IPPO FCP MEP E3T GAMMA SBC

Cramped Room       

> IPPO FCP MEP E3T GAMMA SBC Mean
> IPPO FCP MEP E3T GAMMA SBC

Asymmetric Advantages       

> IPPO FCP MEP E3T GAMMA SBC Mean
> IPPO FCP MEP E3T GAMMA SBC

Mean       

> IPPO FCP MEP E3T GAMMA SBC Mean
> IPPO FCP MEP E3T GAMMA SBC

Counter Circuit       

> IPPO FCP MEP E3T GAMMA SBC Mean
> IPPO FCP MEP E3T GAMMA SBC

Forced Coordination 

Figure D.4: Held-out XP heatmaps on Overcooked v1. The bottom-right panel shows the mean across all five layouts. 23 D.3 Full Table & Learning Curves for Overcooked v1 

Table D.1 reports the full episode returns and Figure D.5 shows the corresponding learning curves on Overcooked v1, evaluated by self-play (SP) and cross-play (XP) scores across five layouts. All values are reported as mean and standard deviation over 10 random seeds. Across all layouts, SBC consistently achieves the highest XP performance while maintaining a small Gap, indicating strong generalization without sacrificing SP performance. In contrast, prior methods often exhibit a large Gap, suggesting overfitting to self-play partners. The learning curves further support these observations as SBC not only converges to higher final returns but also demonstrates faster convergence to the optimal. Table D.1: Episode return on Overcooked v1. Values are mean ± standard deviation across 10 random seeds. Bold indicates the best results within each layout. 

Counter Circuit Coordination Ring Cramped Room Method SP XP Gap SP XP Gap SP XP Gap IPPO 158 ± 27 32 ± 12 126 287 ± 23 41 ± 11 246 253 ± 9 187 ± 36 66 

FCP 103 ± 43 107 ± 17 4 159 ± 29 166 ± 11 7 224 ± 50 227 ± 19 3

MEP 87 ± 24 83 ± 11 4 142 ± 28 143 ± 11 1 203 ± 17 205 ± 7 2

E3T 121 ± 31 38 ± 9 83 181 ± 58 98 ± 24 83 234 ± 6 165 ± 27 69 

GAMMA 66 ± 29 74 ± 14 8 143 ± 64 142 ± 23 1 181 ± 24 182 ± 7 1

CEC 82 ± 31 52 ± 12 30 203 ± 40 175 ± 16 28 221 ± 21 219 ± 19 2

SBC 246 ± 38 168 ± 32 78 333 ± 13 316 ± 18 17 257 ± 5 256 ± 1 1

Forced Coordination Asymmetric Advantages Method SP XP Gap SP XP Gap IPPO 200 ± 29 10 ± 11 190 500 ± 1 499 ± 9 1

FCP 128 ± 37 140 ± 9 12 498 ± 3 479 ± 25 19 

MEP 38 ± 21 43 ± 10 5 40 ± 74 64 ± 50 24 

E3T 176 ± 10 105 ± 22 71 229 ± 13 226 ± 4 3

GAMMA 108 ± 35 129 ± 11 21 240 ± 1 240 ± 1 0

CEC 112 ± 26 81 ± 13 31 283 ± 18 251 ± 17 32 

SBC 193 ± 10 160 ± 23 33 500 ± 21 493 ± 10 7SBC (Ours)                                      

> CEC
> GAMMA
> E3T
> MEP
> FCP
> IPPO
> Coordination Ring
> Cramped Room
> Asymmetric Advantages Counter Circuit
> Forced Coordination Mean
> Return
> env steps
> 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0
> 1e7
> 0
> 50
> 25
> 75
> 100
> 125
> 150
> 175
> Re turn
> env steps
> 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0
> 1e7
> 0
> 100
> 50
> 150
> 200
> 250
> 300
> Return
> env steps
> 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0
> 1e7
> 0
> 200
> 100
> 300
> 400
> 500
> Return
> env steps
> 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0
> 1e7
> 0
> 100
> 50
> Re turn
> env steps
> 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0
> 1e7
> 0
> 50
> 25
> 75
> 100
> 125
> 150
> 175
> Return
> env steps
> 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0
> 1e7
> 0
> 100
> 50
> 150
> 200
> 250
> 200
> 150
> 250
> 300
> 400
> 350

Figure D.5: Learning curves on Overcooked v1. The solid lines show the mean cross-play (XP) return averaged over 10 random seeds, whereas the shaded areas indicate the standard deviation. 24 E Additional Analysis 

This section provides additional analyses of SBC. While Appendix E.1 analyzes how SBC generalizes well to unseen partners through trajectory analysis, Appendices E.2 and E.3 extend the component evaluations and ablations on hyperparameters to additional Overcooked v1 layouts. Finally, Sec-tion E.4 compares the computational cost of SBC against the considered baselines. 

E.1 Human–AI Behavior Analysis 

This section analyzes human–AI trajectories to explain why SBC coordinates well with diverse unseen human partners. Figure E.1 reports the per-episode mean counts of seven behavioral primitives, averaged across all five Overcooked v1 layouts and human–AI trajectories. Prior baselines mainly show low-level behaviors such as simple pick-up actions, with fewer deliveries and rare passing or receiving. In contrast, SBC exhibits substantially higher counts of cooperative behaviors, including passing, receiving, and frequent deliveries. Figure E.2 provides a qualitative example. When the human agent passes an ingredient, IPPO fails to adapt, collides with the human agent, and continues acting independently. By contrast, SBC receives the ingredient and completes the delivery. Together, these results suggest that SBC learns a broader set of human-compatible coordination patterns through exposure to blocking-aware partners, enabling the ego policy to adapt to unseen human behaviors. IPPO  FCP  MEP  E3T  GAMMA  SBC   

> Pick up potato
> Pick up plate
> Pick up soup
> Delivery
> Pas s
> Receive
> Add to Po t

Figure E.1: Per-episode mean counts of seven behavioral primitives, averaged across all five Over-cooked v1 layouts. Darker cells indicate higher counts. IPPO 

State -Blocked Coordination     

> AI agent Human agent Agent path
> Pass Collision
> Pass
> Receive Pick up plate
> Collision
> Add to pot
> Pass
> Pick up soup
> Fail
> Success
> Delivery

Figure E.2: Visualization of IPPO and SBC behaviors when the human agent passes an ingredient on 

Counter Circuit in Overcooked v1. 25 E.2 Component ablation across all layouts 

Table E.1 extends the component ablation to all five Overcooked v1 layouts. According to the results, removing the blocking-aware partner causes the largest average drop, highlighting its central role in enabling robust coordination under diverse partner behaviors. Removing the SP partner also leads to substantial degradation, particularly in coordination-intensive layouts such as Counter Circuit and Coordination Ring, where learning stable conventions is essential. Furthermore, Uniform sampling and strict penalties consistently hurt performance, indicating the importance of allowing flexible adaptation. On the other hand, Action prediction leads to smaller gains, suggesting it provides complementary improvements in modeling partner behavior. Overall, while the magnitude of impact differs across components and layouts, all components contribute to performance, and the full SBC design is necessary to achieve strong and consistent coordination across diverse settings. Table E.1: Component ablation across Overcooked v1 layouts (XP score). Mean is the average across layouts. Bold marks the best per column.                                                                                                       

> Variant Counter Circuit Coord. Ring Cramped Room Forced Coord. Asymm. Adv. Mean SBC (Ours) 168 ±32 .0316 ±18 .0256 ±1.0160 ±23 .0493 ±10 .0278 .6
> w/ uniform sampling 119 ±30 .4257 ±23 .8247 ±3.4115 ±29 .6459 ±17 .8239 .4
> w/o action prediction 142 ±28 .6193 ±94 .8244 ±4.6103 ±44 .9448 ±48 .0226 .0
> w/ strict penalty 123 ±25 .3208 ±38 .7242 ±4.974 ±30 .2468 ±8.3223 .0
> w/o SP partner 69 ±19 .740 ±35 .470 ±22 .876 ±21 .4469 ±13 .7144 .8
> w/o blocking-aware partner 38 ±8.598 ±17 .0165 ±14 .2105 ±11 .3226 ±2.8126 .4

26 E.3 Hyperparameter ablation on three additional layouts 

In addition to Counter Circuit reported in Section 5.4, we analyze the effect of the penalty coefficient α and the maximum size of the penalty-state set K on three additional Overcooked v1 layouts: Coordination Ring , Cramped Room , and Forced Coordination . Most importantly, we observe that across all layouts, removing the penalty signal (i.e., α = 0 or K = 0 ) consistently yields the worst cross-play (XP) performance, highlighting that penalty-based guidance is essential for learning robust coordination. As α increases from zero, XP performance improves substantially, but overly large values eventually degrade performance, revealing a trade-off between coordination and over-penalizing useful behaviors. A similar pattern is observed when varying K. Increasing K from zero significantly improves XP, confirming the importance of capturing coordination failures, while larger values lead to diminishing returns or slight degradation, suggesting that excessively broad penalty-state sets introduce noise. Overall, these results demonstrate that penalty signals are critical for coordination, and that choosing appropriate α and K can provide informative guidance without over-constraining the policy. Return    

> (No penalty )
> Return
> (No penalty )
> Return
> (No penalty )

Figure E.3: Penalty coefficient α sweep. (a) Coordination Ring , (b) Cramped Room , (c) Forced Coordination . Green: self-play; red: cross-play. Return     

> Return
> Return
> (No penalty )(No penalty )(No penalty )

Figure E.4: Maximum size of the penalty-state set K sweep. (a) Coordination Ring , (b) Cramped Room , (c) Forced Coordination .27 E.4 Computational Cost 

Table E.2 reports the total training time required to reach 30M environment steps across Overcooked layouts, averaged over 10 seeds. For SBC, the 30M budget refers to the combined total environment interactions across both the normal policy and the blocking-aware policy rollouts, ensuring sample-budget parity with all baselines. For FCP, the reported time includes both the construction of the diversity pool and the subsequent pool-based training. For GAMMA, we report the time required to reach 100M steps, which is necessary to obtain reasonable performance. For CEC, we report the total time for a single unified training run over all layouts (3000M steps), as it leverages cross-layout experience rather than training separate policies per layout. Overall, SBC introduces a moderate computational overhead compared to lightweight baselines such as IPPO and E3T. On average, SBC requires 2 h 27 m of training, compared to 1 h 33 m for IPPO and 1 h 40 m for E3T, corresponding to an increase of approximately +58% over IPPO. However, this additional cost is modest relative to the substantial gains in coordination performance, especially since SBC remains significantly more efficient than methods with heavier training procedures, such as GAMMA, which is approximately 2.7 times slower than SBC. These results demonstrate that SBC provides an efficient approach to learning robust coordination, achieving strong performance improvements with a reasonable increase in training time. Table E.2: Total training time comparison across Overcooked layouts ( h: hour, m: minute). Times are averaged over 10 seeds. 

Method Cramped Asymmetric Coord. Forced Counter Mean Room Advantages Ring Coord. Circuit 

IPPO 1 h 17 m 1 h 58 m 1 h 24 m 1 h 23 m 1 h 41 m 1 h 33 m FCP 2 h 49 m 3 h 43 m 2 h 52 m 2 h 53 m 3 h 45 m 3 h 12 m MEP 1 h 52 m 2 h 54 m 2 h 04 m 3 h 08 m 3 h 32 m 2 h 42 m E3T 1 h 06 m 1 h 50 m 1 h 15 m 1 h 28 m 2 h 41 m 1 h 40 m GAMMA 5 h 28 m 8 h 46 m 5 h 50 m 6 h 17 m 6 h 27 m 6 h 33 m CEC 44 h 15 m (single unified training) 8 h 51 m 

SBC (Ours) 2 h 20 m 2 h 34 m 2 h 29 m 2 h 21 m 2 h 30 m 2 h 27 m 

## F Broader Impacts 

This work studies zero-shot coordination, aiming to train agents that cooperate effectively with unseen partners, including humans. Such methods may contribute to broader research on human coordination, human–AI collaboration, and AI–AI coordination by enabling agents to adapt to partners with different conventions, preferences, and behaviors. This has potential applications in collaborative robotics, shared-autonomy systems, mixed human–robot teams, and cooperative multi-agent systems where independently trained agents must coordinate without prior joint training. More broadly, improving zero-shot coordination can support the development of cooperative AI systems that interact more flexibly with both human and artificial partners. Since our method is trained and evaluated in simulation, real-world deployment would require validation for sim-to-real robustness and safety. 28 NeurIPS Paper Checklist 

1. Claims 

Question: Do the main claims made in the abstract and introduction accurately reflect the paper’s contributions and scope? Answer: [Yes] Justification: The abstract and introduction clearly state our main contributions, including the SBC framework with value-guided penalty-state scheduling, and our evaluation on Multi-Destination Spread and Overcooked v1, including human–AI coordination, which are supported by the experimental results in Section 5 and Section 5.5. Guidelines: • The answer [N/A] means that the abstract and introduction do not include the claims made in the paper. • The abstract and/or introduction should clearly state the claims made, including the contributions made in the paper and important assumptions and limitations. A [No] or [N/A] answer to this question will not be perceived well by the reviewers. • The claims made should match theoretical and experimental results, and reflect how much the results can be expected to generalize to other settings. • It is fine to include aspirational goals as motivation as long as it is clear that these goals are not attained by the paper. 2. Limitations 

Question: Does the paper discuss the limitations of the work performed by the authors? Answer: [Yes] Justification: We discuss the limitations of our work in Section 6, including the additional hyperparameters introduced by SBC, scaling behavior to settings with more agents, and the computational overhead of value-gap estimation. Guidelines: • The answer [N/A] means that the paper has no limitation while the answer [No] means that the paper has limitations, but those are not discussed in the paper. • The authors are encouraged to create a separate “Limitations” section in their paper. • The paper should point out any strong assumptions and how robust the results are to violations of these assumptions (e.g., independence assumptions, noiseless settings, model well-specification, asymptotic approximations only holding locally). The authors should reflect on how these assumptions might be violated in practice and what the implications would be. • The authors should reflect on the scope of the claims made, e.g., if the approach was only tested on a few datasets or with a few runs. In general, empirical results often depend on implicit assumptions, which should be articulated. • The authors should reflect on the factors that influence the performance of the approach. For example, a facial recognition algorithm may perform poorly when image resolution is low or images are taken in low lighting. Or a speech-to-text system might not be used reliably to provide closed captions for online lectures because it fails to handle technical jargon. • The authors should discuss the computational efficiency of the proposed algorithms and how they scale with dataset size. • If applicable, the authors should discuss possible limitations of their approach to address problems of privacy and fairness. • While the authors might fear that complete honesty about limitations might be used by reviewers as grounds for rejection, a worse outcome might be that reviewers discover limitations that aren’t acknowledged in the paper. The authors should use their best judgment and recognize that individual actions in favor of transparency play an impor-tant role in developing norms that preserve the integrity of the community. Reviewers will be specifically instructed to not penalize honesty concerning limitations. 3. Theory assumptions and proofs 

29 Question: For each theoretical result, does the paper provide the full set of assumptions and a complete (and correct) proof? Answer: [N/A] Justification: The paper does not include theoretical results; our contributions are empirical. Guidelines: • The answer [N/A] means that the paper does not include theoretical results. • All the theorems, formulas, and proofs in the paper should be numbered and cross-referenced. • All assumptions should be clearly stated or referenced in the statement of any theorems. • The proofs can either appear in the main paper or the supplemental material, but if they appear in the supplemental material, the authors are encouraged to provide a short proof sketch to provide intuition. • Inversely, any informal proof provided in the core of the paper should be complemented by formal proofs provided in appendix or supplemental material. • Theorems and Lemmas that the proof relies upon should be properly referenced. 4. Experimental result reproducibility 

Question: Does the paper fully disclose all the information needed to reproduce the main ex-perimental results of the paper to the extent that it affects the main claims and/or conclusions of the paper (regardless of whether the code and data are provided or not)? Answer: [Yes] Justification: We provide the full SBC algorithm in Section 4.2 (Algorithm 1), implementa-tion details in Appendix A, environment details in Appendix B, and full hyperparameters and evaluation protocols in Appendix C. Guidelines: • The answer [N/A] means that the paper does not include experiments. • If the paper includes experiments, a [No] answer to this question will not be perceived well by the reviewers: Making the paper reproducible is important, regardless of whether the code and data are provided or not. • If the contribution is a dataset and/or model, the authors should describe the steps taken to make their results reproducible or verifiable. • Depending on the contribution, reproducibility can be accomplished in various ways. For example, if the contribution is a novel architecture, describing the architecture fully might suffice, or if the contribution is a specific model and empirical evaluation, it may be necessary to either make it possible for others to replicate the model with the same dataset, or provide access to the model. In general. releasing code and data is often one good way to accomplish this, but reproducibility can also be provided via detailed instructions for how to replicate the results, access to a hosted model (e.g., in the case of a large language model), releasing of a model checkpoint, or other means that are appropriate to the research performed. • While NeurIPS does not require releasing code, the conference does require all submis-sions to provide some reasonable avenue for reproducibility, which may depend on the nature of the contribution. For example (a) If the contribution is primarily a new algorithm, the paper should make it clear how to reproduce that algorithm. (b) If the contribution is primarily a new model architecture, the paper should describe the architecture clearly and fully. (c) If the contribution is a new model (e.g., a large language model), then there should either be a way to access this model for reproducing the results or a way to reproduce the model (e.g., with an open-source dataset or instructions for how to construct the dataset). (d) We recognize that reproducibility may be tricky in some cases, in which case authors are welcome to describe the particular way they provide for reproducibility. In the case of closed-source models, it may be that access to the model is limited in some way (e.g., to registered users), but it should be possible for other researchers to have some path to reproducing or verifying the results. 30 5. Open access to data and code 

Question: Does the paper provide open access to the data and code, with sufficient instruc-tions to faithfully reproduce the main experimental results, as described in supplemental material? Answer: [Yes] Justification: We provide an anonymized code package as supplementary material, including instructions to reproduce our main experimental results, with full release planned upon publication. The Overcooked v1 environment and human demonstration data. Guidelines: • The answer [N/A] means that paper does not include experiments requiring code. • Please see the NeurIPS code and data submission guidelines ( https://neurips.cc/ public/guides/CodeSubmissionPolicy ) for more details. • While we encourage the release of code and data, we understand that this might not be possible, so [No] is an acceptable answer. Papers cannot be rejected simply for not including code, unless this is central to the contribution (e.g., for a new open-source benchmark). • The instructions should contain the exact command and environment needed to run to reproduce the results. See the NeurIPS code and data submission guidelines ( https: //neurips.cc/public/guides/CodeSubmissionPolicy ) for more details. • The authors should provide instructions on data access and preparation, including how to access the raw data, preprocessed data, intermediate data, and generated data, etc. • The authors should provide scripts to reproduce all experimental results for the new proposed method and baselines. If only a subset of experiments are reproducible, they should state which ones are omitted from the script and why. • At submission time, to preserve anonymity, the authors should release anonymized versions (if applicable). • Providing as much information as possible in supplemental material (appended to the paper) is recommended, but including URLs to data and code is permitted. 6. Experimental setting/details 

Question: Does the paper specify all the training and test details (e.g., data splits, hyperpa-rameters, how they were chosen, type of optimizer) necessary to understand the results? Answer: [Yes] Justification: Training and evaluation details, including hyperparameters (Appendix C.1), optimizer choices, the number of random seeds (10 per method), episode lengths, and evaluation protocols (Appendix C.3), are reported in Section 5 and Appendix C. Guidelines: • The answer [N/A] means that the paper does not include experiments. • The experimental setting should be presented in the core of the paper to a level of detail that is necessary to appreciate the results and make sense of them. • The full details can be provided either with the code, in appendix, or as supplemental material. 7. Experiment statistical significance 

Question: Does the paper report error bars suitably and correctly defined or other appropriate information about the statistical significance of the experiments? Answer: [Yes] Justification: All quantitative results are aggregated over 10 random seeds per method and reported as mean ± standard deviation, with variability arising from random initialization and seed-induced training stochasticity. For real-human evaluation, we additionally conduct two-sided Wilcoxon signed-rank tests ( p < 0.01 ) to assess statistical significance under the within-subjects experimental design, as reported in Section 5.5 and Appendix C.3. Guidelines: • The answer [N/A] means that the paper does not include experiments. 31 • The authors should answer [Yes] if the results are accompanied by error bars, confidence intervals, or statistical significance tests, at least for the experiments that support the main claims of the paper. • The factors of variability that the error bars are capturing should be clearly stated (for example, train/test split, initialization, random drawing of some parameter, or overall run with given experimental conditions). • The method for calculating the error bars should be explained (closed form formula, call to a library function, bootstrap, etc.) • The assumptions made should be given (e.g., Normally distributed errors). • It should be clear whether the error bar is the standard deviation or the standard error of the mean. • It is OK to report 1-sigma error bars, but one should state it. The authors should preferably report a 2-sigma error bar than state that they have a 96% CI, if the hypothesis of Normality of errors is not verified. • For asymmetric distributions, the authors should be careful not to show in tables or figures symmetric error bars that would yield results that are out of range (e.g., negative error rates). • If error bars are reported in tables or plots, the authors should explain in the text how they were calculated and reference the corresponding figures or tables in the text. 8. Experiments compute resources 

Question: For each experiment, does the paper provide sufficient information on the computer resources (type of compute workers, memory, time of execution) needed to reproduce the experiments? Answer: [Yes] Justification: Compute resources used for training and evaluation are described in Ap-pendix E.4. Guidelines: • The answer [N/A] means that the paper does not include experiments. • The paper should indicate the type of compute workers CPU or GPU, internal cluster, or cloud provider, including relevant memory and storage. • The paper should provide the amount of compute required for each of the individual experimental runs as well as estimate the total compute. • The paper should disclose whether the full research project required more compute than the experiments reported in the paper (e.g., preliminary or failed experiments that didn’t make it into the paper). 9. Code of ethics 

Question: Does the research conducted in the paper conform, in every respect, with the NeurIPS Code of Ethics https://neurips.cc/public/EthicsGuidelines ?Answer: [Yes] Justification: All authors have reviewed the NeurIPS Code of Ethics, and the research conforms to it in every respect. Guidelines: • The answer [N/A] means that the authors have not reviewed the NeurIPS Code of Ethics. • If the authors answer [No], they should explain the special circumstances that require a deviation from the Code of Ethics. • The authors should make sure to preserve anonymity (e.g., if there is a special consid-eration due to laws or regulations in their jurisdiction). 10. Broader impacts 

Question: Does the paper discuss both potential positive societal impacts and negative societal impacts of the work performed? Answer: [Yes] 32 Justification: We discuss potential positive and negative societal impacts of our work in Appendix F. Guidelines: • The answer [N/A] means that there is no societal impact of the work performed. • If the authors answer [N/A] or [No], they should explain why their work has no societal impact or why the paper does not address societal impact. • Examples of negative societal impacts include potential malicious or unintended uses (e.g., disinformation, generating fake profiles, surveillance), fairness considerations (e.g., deployment of technologies that could make decisions that unfairly impact specific groups), privacy considerations, and security considerations. • The conference expects that many papers will be foundational research and not tied to particular applications, let alone deployments. However, if there is a direct path to any negative applications, the authors should point it out. For example, it is legitimate to point out that an improvement in the quality of generative models could be used to generate Deepfakes for disinformation. On the other hand, it is not needed to point out that a generic algorithm for optimizing neural networks could enable people to train models that generate Deepfakes faster. • The authors should consider possible harms that could arise when the technology is being used as intended and functioning correctly, harms that could arise when the technology is being used as intended but gives incorrect results, and harms following from (intentional or unintentional) misuse of the technology. • If there are negative societal impacts, the authors could also discuss possible mitigation strategies (e.g., gated release of models, providing defenses in addition to attacks, mechanisms for monitoring misuse, mechanisms to monitor how a system learns from feedback over time, improving the efficiency and accessibility of ML). 11. Safeguards 

Question: Does the paper describe safeguards that have been put in place for responsible release of data or models that have a high risk for misuse (e.g., pre-trained language models, image generators, or scraped datasets)? Answer: [N/A] Justification: Our work does not release pretrained models or datasets that pose a high risk of misuse; the trained policies operate only within benchmark cooperative game simulators (Multi-Destination Spread and Overcooked v1). Guidelines: • The answer [N/A] means that the paper poses no such risks. • Released models that have a high risk for misuse or dual-use should be released with necessary safeguards to allow for controlled use of the model, for example by requiring that users adhere to usage guidelines or restrictions to access the model or implementing safety filters. • Datasets that have been scraped from the Internet could pose safety risks. The authors should describe how they avoided releasing unsafe images. • We recognize that providing effective safeguards is challenging, and many papers do not require this, but we encourage authors to take this into account and make a best faith effort. 12. Licenses for existing assets 

Question: Are the creators or original owners of assets (e.g., code, data, models), used in the paper, properly credited and are the license and terms of use explicitly mentioned and properly respected? Answer: [Yes] Justification: We use the open-source Overcooked-AI codebase [ 23 ], including its human demonstration data and behavior cloning model, with proper citation. Our implementa-tion is also built on top of JaxMARL [ 51 ] as the core training infrastructure. Baseline implementations from open-source releases are also cited in Appendix C.2. 33 Guidelines: • The answer [N/A] means that the paper does not use existing assets. • The authors should cite the original paper that produced the code package or dataset. • The authors should state which version of the asset is used and, if possible, include a URL. • The name of the license (e.g., CC-BY 4.0) should be included for each asset. • For scraped data from a particular source (e.g., website), the copyright and terms of service of that source should be provided. • If assets are released, the license, copyright information, and terms of use in the package should be provided. For popular datasets, paperswithcode.com/datasets 

has curated licenses for some datasets. Their licensing guide can help determine the license of a dataset. • For existing datasets that are re-packaged, both the original license and the license of the derived asset (if it has changed) should be provided. • If this information is not available online, the authors are encouraged to reach out to the asset’s creators. 13. New assets 

Question: Are new assets introduced in the paper well documented and is the documentation provided alongside the assets? Answer: [Yes] Justification: We will release our code and the custom web interface used for real-human eval-uation, with documentation describing training, evaluation, and study procedures, alongside the anonymized code release. Guidelines: • The answer [N/A] means that the paper does not release new assets. • Researchers should communicate the details of the dataset/code/model as part of their submissions via structured templates. This includes details about training, license, limitations, etc. • The paper should discuss whether and how consent was obtained from people whose asset is used. • At submission time, remember to anonymize your assets (if applicable). You can either create an anonymized URL or include an anonymized zip file. 14. Crowdsourcing and research with human subjects 

Question: For crowdsourcing experiments and research with human subjects, does the paper include the full text of instructions given to participants and screenshots, if applicable, as well as details about compensation (if any)? Answer: [Yes] Justification: We describe the human study protocol in Appendix C.3, including the web interface and pre-session instructions shown to participants (Figure C.1). All participants provided informed consent, and were fairly compensated for their time at a rate at or above the local minimum wage in the country where the data was collected, in accordance with the NeurIPS Code of Ethics. Guidelines: • The answer [N/A] means that the paper does not involve crowdsourcing nor research with human subjects. • Including this information in the supplemental material is fine, but if the main contribu-tion of the paper involves human subjects, then as much detail as possible should be included in the main paper. • According to the NeurIPS Code of Ethics, workers involved in data collection, curation, or other labor should be paid at least the minimum wage in the country of the data collector. 15. Institutional review board (IRB) approvals or equivalent for research with human subjects 

34 Question: Does the paper describe potential risks incurred by study participants, whether such risks were disclosed to the subjects, and whether Institutional Review Board (IRB) approvals (or an equivalent approval/review based on the requirements of your country or institution) were obtained? Answer: [Yes] Justification: Our human study follows the IRB protocol approved by our institution, as stated in Appendix C.3. Potential risks were minimal and disclosed to participants through the consent form. Guidelines: • The answer [N/A] means that the paper does not involve crowdsourcing nor research with human subjects. • Depending on the country in which research is conducted, IRB approval (or equivalent) may be required for any human subjects research. If you obtained IRB approval, you should clearly state this in the paper. • We recognize that the procedures for this may vary significantly between institutions and locations, and we expect authors to adhere to the NeurIPS Code of Ethics and the guidelines for their institution. • For initial submissions, do not include any information that would break anonymity (if applicable), such as the institution conducting the review. 16. Declaration of LLM usage 

Question: Does the paper describe the usage of LLMs if it is an important, original, or non-standard component of the core methods in this research? Note that if the LLM is used only for writing, editing, or formatting purposes and does not impact the core methodology, scientific rigor, or originality of the research, declaration is not required. Answer: [N/A] Justification: LLMs were used only for writing and editing assistance and did not contribute to the core methodology, scientific rigor, or originality of this research. Guidelines: • The answer [N/A] means that the core method development in this research does not involve LLMs as any important, original, or non-standard components. • Please refer to our LLM policy in the NeurIPS handbook for what should or should not be described. 35