Title: Cooperation in Human and Machine Agents: Promise Theory Considerations

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.10505v1

Published Time: Tue, 14 Apr 2026 01:05:08 GMT

Number of Pages: 19

Markdown Content:
# Cooperation in Human and Machine Agents 

## Promise Theory Considerations 

Mark Burgess ChiTek-i AS 12 April 2026 

Abstract —Agent based systems are more common than we may think. A Promise Theory perspective on cooperation, in systems of human-machine agents, offers a unified perspective on organization and functional design with semi-automated efforts, in terms of the abstract properties of autonomous agents, This applies to human efforts, hardware systems, software, and artificial intelligence, with and without management. One may ask how does a reasoning system of components keep to an intended purpose? As the agent paradigm is now being revived, in connection with artificial intelligence agents, I revisit established principles of agent cooperation, as applied to humans, machines, and their mutual interactions. Promise Theory represents the fundamentals of signalling, comprehension, trust, risk, and feedback between agents, and offers some lessons about success and failure. 

CONTENTS 

I Introduction 1

II Basic Promise Theory 2II-A Notation and definitions . . . . . . . . . 2

III Behaviour as voluntary cooperation 3III-A The receiver wins: the Downstream Prin-ciple . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4III-B Assessment of responsibility . . . . . . 4

IV Communicating intended outcomes 4IV-A Shared language . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4IV-B Consistency and comprehension of lan-guage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6IV-C Comprehension uncertainty . . . . . . . 6IV-D Language uncertainty during serial-parallel composition . . . . . . . . . . . 7IV-E Autonomous agents appear non-deterministic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8IV-F Intended purpose, free will . . . . . . . 8

V Trust and its consequences 9V-A Work and effort . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9V-B Trust and risk . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10 

VI Collective action 11 VI-A Stigmergy: exterior memory and com-mon knowledge . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11 VI-B Authority, calibrated subordination, and hierarchy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11 VI-C Cooperation involving proxy agents . . 11 VI-D Agreement and contracts . . . . . . . . 13 VI-E Normative teams and swarms . . . . . . 14 VI-F Feedback and rewards . . . . . . . . . . 14 VI-G Pride in work, emotional measures . . . 15 VI-H Convergence to desired or intended state 15 

VII Human-Machine society 16 VII-A Human-machine hand-over risk . . . . . 16 VII-B Unified direction: societal progress . . . 17 VII-C Policing of cooperative behaviour . . . 17 

VIII Conclusions 18 

References 19 I. I NTRODUCTION 

Autonomy is the base state of any operational entity, human or machine. Paradoxically, it is also an unconventional notion in technology, which focuses historically on totally subordinated or “managed” devices, governed by “command and control”. That idealized notion of control has long been viewed as the natural ‘force for order’ in a world of slowly varying, self-regulating systems, but today it falls short when describing the multitude of methods, at all scales of space and time, that render such direct command infeasible. Promise Theory [1]–[3] was proposed in 2004 to address the issue of autonomy as a fundamental viewpoint in software ‘robot’ systems, specifically CFEngine [1]. It was a response to the perceived lack of progress in the field of multi-agent distributed systems, which had foundered on universally adopting logical deontic reasoning [4]–[6] and control theory [7]–[9] as a model of cybernetic control. Autonomous agents are significantly different from remotely managed robotic entities; they must handle every scenario independently; they are intrinsically non-deterministic, and they require more comprehensive specifications to constrain their behaviours. Promise Theory seeks to address these issues. Trying to apply (deontic) obligation logics, together with ideas from Control Theory, led to unrealistic remote command models of behaviour that could not be scaled beyond sim-ple state controllers. The deployment of autonomous agent CFEngine (1993-) as a datacentre management engine, around the world, was a watershed moment that proved autonomous agents were indeed possible and could be run on a massive scale, subject to certain self-maintaining policies [10]. CFEngine employed autonomous agents, and marked the starting point for Promise Theory, in terms of limitations and capabilities of agents working alone or in groups. 

> arXiv:2604.10505v1 [cs.AI] 12 Apr 2026

Autonomous agents differ from fully subordinated, remotely controlled automata, because—when conflicts arise between multiple agents—they cannot be resolved simply by shouting louder. Autonomous agents do not have to pay attention; they must have the capacity to adapt to ambient conditions of their own volition, form structures (like swarms), and solve challenges through the balance of offer and avoidance. The basic theory of cooperation has already been elaborated in [11], [12]. However, since this was long before the current wave of agent language models, related to artificial intelligence, took hold, it is appropriate to review and update the basic findings of Promise Theory as a guide to both strategy and governance. There has been a renewed interest in Promise Theory, in connection with Artificial Intelligence, especially Language Models, and robotics, since it has already formulated many of the issues authors confront when deploying systems. Here, I shall try to present the results in a general way, without referring to specific implementations. What Promise Theory emphasizes is that functional roles 

matter more than technological will, as long as one is honest in characterizing them. Roles are simply expressions of particular promises, which in turn are a declaration of intent that encompasses two aspects: what is being promised (a qualitative or semantic issue) and how much and how often (a quantitative or dynamic issue). The plan for this document is as follows. Following a brief recap of Promise Theory basic ideas and notations, I discuss the notion of voluntary cooperation and subordination for autonomous agents, along with the all-important Downstream Principle. Next, we consider how shared language semantics are a prerequisite for communicating intent between independent agents, and how this issue alone leads to significant uncertainty both for humans and machines. Then, we address the dynamic 

quantitative issue of trust its relation to an agent’s risk appetite. Finally, I bring together the points to describe the aims and pitfalls of cooperating to enact collective action and explain the role of fixed points in defining idealized attractor states, II. B ASIC PROMISE THEORY 

The fundamental tenet of Promise Theory is this: 

“No agent may promise anything on behalf of any agent but itself.” 

Take a moment to let this sink in, because attempts to work around this causal limitation account for almost all misunderstandings and errors in agent systems. Working through the logical consequences of this statement is what Promise Theory is about, in its entirety. The remainder of this paper is about unpicking the detailed consequences of reining in autonomous behaviour. Autonomy means that agents stand alone, as sovereigns in command of their own interior resources. The concept of ‘agency’ is sometimes confused with an idea about free will, but this is false. Agency simply means that there may exist entities for which no outside influence can fully determine their behaviour. Some directed effort can come from within a bounded region that we call an agent, and this only requires there to be some internal modification of state. This is a deeply unnatural idea for humans to accept, both on a personal as well as an engineering level. The desire for control is deeply ingrained into us, perhaps because we have evolved to make extensive use of our hands. We want to touch, manipulate, wrestle with adversaries, push buttons, and pull levers; but, if we are suddenly unable to touch and are forced to work in a different way, what could we do? How does the world look to a single cell, to a tree, or talking to someone on the other end of a telephone line? In Promise Theory, every system is modelled as a collection of agents, of different varieties, denoted Ai, whose properties remain to be described. Agents may be atoms, cells, humans, or machines, hardware or software, etc. They may be any shape or size (if that has any meaning). Agents may contain other agents by composition. What happens outside agents is not Promise Theory’s concern: we focus on how agents influence one another, leading to expected outcomes. Crucially, agents are finite but have some measure of ’interior’ resources, depending on their nature. Their capabilities, energy, and other resources are all finite. Agents are thus a model for any bounded active process [3].  

> •

The interior of an agent is not observable to other agents.  

> •

Agents may possess or form intentional behaviours.  

> •

An intention is a causally directed notion about a possible outcome. The number and scope of possible outcomes depends on whatever capabilities the agent has.  

> •

On their exterior, agents can communicate with other agents to express their intentions. The sharing of an intention is what we mean by a promise. None of these capabilities represent intelligent thought or free will, they are simply process characteristics. 

Example 1 (APIs and asynchonrous interfaces): At this stage, many programmers will identify promises they know as Application Programmer Interfaces (APIs). API functions are certainly examples of promises offered by software agents. In languages that offer asynchronous responses, e.g. JavaScript, there are features branded as ‘promises’, which are a particular case compatible with the Promise Theory notion of a promise. The molecular donor and receptor spikes on cells are similarly effective promises made by cells, and door handles and emergency exit signs are also agents that make promises. Promise Theory deals with general notions, not only informa-tion technology concepts. In doing so, it offers an opportunity to treat humans and other forms of machinery on a common basis—to view technology in the context of a human society. 

A. Notation and definitions 

An abstract notation for promises is helpful for formulating problems more clearly. The generic label for agents in Promise 

> 2

Theory is Ai, where Latin subscripts i, j, k, . . . numbers dis-tinguishable agents for convenience (these effectively become coordinates for the agents). We shall often use the symbols 

Si and Rj , instead, for agents to emphasize their roles as source (initiator) and receiver (reactor). So the schematic flow of reasoning is: 1) S offers (+ promises) data. 2) R accepts (- promises) or rejects the data, either in full or in part. 3) R observes and forms an assessment αR(.) of what it receives. Observations and assessments are limited only by the capa-bilities of the agent. They may be economic assessments, to minimize or maximize some parameter. They may be semantic assessments to stay close to a logical or symbolic constraint. They are a key culprit in the indeterminism of agent systems. One should be careful in anthropomorphizing too much. One uses the words promise, assessment, etc because the convey the correct meaning in the limiting case of complex human agents, but equally assumptions have to be scaled back when being used for simpler agents with limited capabilities. For a molecule, an acceptance of a promise may be equivalent to accepting a donor molecule by docking with it. The elementary agents of a system embody processes , any of which may express promises about state and services. Processes are hosted at agent locations Ai, S i, R i etc. Agents have finite resources, so their capabilities are limited. However, they might over-promise accidentally or deliberately, e.g. promise 10 parking spaces for 20 cars, or 100 seats for 150 passengers. Such a promise can be resolved by time-sharing. Promises may refer to agents, e.g.  

> •

A scalar promise refers to no other agents, e.g. I promise to brush my teeth +b. 

> •

A vector promise refers to a single third party, e.g. I promise to follow orders from A3: = b(A3). 

> •

A tensor promise may refer to any number of agents, e.g. I promise to get the best deal from suppliers 

+b(A1, A 2, . . . , A n).Promise also come in two major flavours. An offer promise, written with body +bi made by Si to Rj is written: 

Ai

> +bi

−−→ Aj , (1) where the + refers to an offer of some information or behaviour (e.g. a service). This is a part of Ai’s autonomous behaviour, and the promise constrains only Ai.

Aj may or may not accept this offer, by making a dual 

acceptance promise, marked −b to denote the orientation of intent: 

Aj

> −bj

−−→ Ai. (2) Only if both offer and acceptance promises are kept can an influence be expected to pass from Ai to Aj . In general, the offer and acceptance may not match precisely, in which case the propagated information will be the overlap (mutual information) 

b∩ = bi ∩ bj , (3) in the manner of mutual information [13], [14]. What form does the abstract ±b take? A form of signalling between them may take the form of a language, from regular language all the way up to advanced (human) language [15]. Agents can offer and accept promised outcomes, so they can also make promises conditionally. To promise b on receipt of a certain conditional c (e.g. if the book arrives, I will read it by Monday): 

Ai

> +b|c

−−−→ Aj . (4) This is not yet a promise, without also passing information about the condition. The receipt of c from some other agent, 

Ak

> +c

−−→ Ai (5) must be taken together with the acceptance of c and signalling of the acceptance to Aj

Ai

> −c

−−→ Ak

Ai

> −c

−−→ Aj (6) Such conditionality is subtle and potentially misleading, as it involves agents as ‘middle men’, which introduces non-deterministic aspects. Agents are not reliable relays in the sense one might expect. III. B EHAVIOUR AS VOLUNTARY COOPERATION 

The simplest building block of promise theory is a single promise exchange. It’s convenient to base the discussion around this concrete binding. Consider the two promises between two agents: 

πS : S +bS

−−→ RπR : R −bR

−−−→ S, (7) representing the offer and acceptance of a single intention bS ,about the behaviour of the originator agent S (the sender) to 

R (the receiver). This is referred to as an example of voluntary cooperation , because there is nothing forcing S to offer bS to 

R. Similarly, R is not under any obligation to accept whatever it is that S is offering. This is to be contrasted with the notion of an imposition :

IS : S +bS

R, (8) which is an attempt to induce the acceptance of bS by force. Impositions are a generally ineffective way of seeking cooperation, because it’s unclear whether the receiver is even aware of the imposition, and further whether it has any reason to comply. Imagine throwing a ball to someone without arranging it first 1.Many technologists will regard this coordination issue as a management issue. If a receiver wasn’t listening, surely we just kick it to restart the service? For a single promise this viewpoint is a plausible in some cases, if a little simplistic, as an answer 

> 1These two cases correspond to the widely known TCP and UDP Internet protocols. TCP is a promise, while UDP is an imposition.
> 3

for information technology. It doesn’t apply to biological agents or organizations. More generally, a missed signal can change the entire evolution of the system in a complex network of time-dependent interactions. 

A. The receiver wins: the Downstream Principle 

One key consequence of autonomy is the inversion of how we think about causality. In classical science, causality is an arrow from now to future. In technology, we are used to exploiting this for commanding and controlling “hands on”. The source of a signal is expected to be the origin of causation: the authoritative decision point. Autonomy refines this, by breaking it into two parts: the authoritative source of message may belong to an ‘upstream’ source agent, but the autonomy of the ‘downstream’ receiver means that it is under no obligation to accept the message. Thus, the decision point, for determining the exchange of a co-operative signal, is weighted ultimately in favour of the receiver. A downstream agent can always reject or even completely alter an outcome downstream. The practical outcome of this is that the role of causation is turned upside down for autonomous agents. Agents can see what they want to see, and thus may distort the “truth” of the system. The significance of autonomy is thus that every interaction is made entirely at the pleasure of the receiver . This is another confusing idea to traditional technologists, who are used to viewing the source as the authoritative signal. A source, however, is only as good as its signal can be heard downstream. Thus, Promise Theory recognizes the Downstream Principle .

Definition 1 (Downstream Principle): Agents downstream, i.e. on the receiving end of an offered promise, have the ultimate power of decision over the outcome. If a provider fails to keep a promise, the downstream agent only has its own policy to blame. It could or should have sourced more than one provider, planned for the promise not keeping kept, and sought out redundancy from multiple sources. In general, responsibility for outcomes flows downstream. 

B. Assessment of responsibility 

In a service interaction, the client user of a system is downstream of everything the system provides, so that user is responsible for their own use of the system: it doesn’t help to blame the newspaper for receiving bad news, or the chatbot for a bad answer. One takes on the risk of an agent’s promise not being kept when choosing to engage with it. I’ll return to this below, in connection with trust. With only two agents, this is easy to grasp. In a distributed system with multiple stakeholders and a complex network of dependencies, it may be much harder. We can try to state the problem: 

Definition 2 (Responsibility for keeping a promise):  

> •

Causal responsibility : When an agent relies on a promise from another, as a dependency, in order to keep its own conditional promise, the causal responsibility it has refers to the freedom to obtain the promised service elsewhere: from its own autonomous choice of partner in the presence of redundant alternatives.  

> •

Moral responsibility (culpability) is a human assessment, about whether agent outcomes stem from good or for bad intent, hence it cannot be formalized except as a norm or in law. This is not a systemic issue, only a subjective assessment. When an agent has no choice but to rely on an upstream promise, it has effectively promised away its own independence. In other words, a client user is always responsible for its own use of a service, because it was not forced to do so. If the service does not keep its promise, this is unfortunate but also to be expected, because guarantees are impossible, and it is the autonomous responsibility of the user to allow for that. Thus the system, in total, may be said to have flaws by design. IV. C OMMUNICATING INTENDED OUTCOMES 

In order to cooperate, agents have to signal their intentions somehow. This might be a simple or a complex effort, depend-ing on the kind of agent. Promises cannot drive expectations without a shared language for signalling intent. Between any two agents, there are three languages to consider:  

> •

The language of the sender,  

> •

The language of the receiver, and  

> •

The exchange co-language of cooperation between the two. An intention, e.g. bS , is the basic formulation of a ‘course of behaviour’ we would like to follow, so we need to discuss what language it speaks. 

A. Shared language 

Consider a set of domain specific languages for signalling intent between agents: ℓ(α), where α denotes each distinct language. A language will consist of a vocabulary 

ℓ(α) → { β(α) 

> a

}, (9) i.e. words that combine somehow to signal intent. Such a language ℓ(α) is the language of promise bodies emanating from some agent Ai:

b(Ai) = 

> C(α)

X

> a=1

ca βa(Ai), (10) where C(α) = dim( {β(α) 

> a

}) is the dimension of the vocabulary. In order for languages to be mutually intelligible, they must be translatable. For simple low order languages, such a translation might be a linear equivalence “word for word”, 

b(Ai) = 

> C(α)

X

> a=1

ca βa(Ai) = 

> C(α′)

X

> b=1

cb βb(Aj ), (11) 

> 4

# LL

12

> 12

L

# ?Fig. 1: Autonomous agents each have their own internal language. There is no authority that calibrates these to be the same without the agents’ consent. This means that, between any two agents there is a subset of language that overlaps and is comprehensible to both, but may still mean different things to each. What happens where these meet? 

where α = α′. In general, however, one language may need more words in order to explain the meaning in a satisfactory way. The larger the dimension of the languages, the greater the probability that they will be able to overlap. If they share common words, or at least have equivalent words, they may be translatable for some intention or utterance. A small language can assign a very precise meaning to a word, that will not be reused outside of a controlled context, but it can’t say many things. Thus, there is a trade-off between trying to lock down meaning in a small language, and allowing free expression over a broad language of exchange. This is the trade-off one faces in technology systems today.  

> •

If we rely on small signal sets, the meanings can be precise to the agent signalling but may be misunderstood by the receiver, unless they have calibrated their interpretations to a specific version of a specific language. This is the approach used in engineering signalling proto-cols, especially for machines and for military systems.  

> •

If we have a broad vocabulary, we might be able to explain concepts in detail to avoid misunderstandings or to compensate for missing words, but this is not a guarantee. Agents may have to talk their way to a calibration of meaning for some time to stabilize their relationship. 

Example 2 (Home assistants): The way language comprehen-sion is applied is quite uneven in contemporary tech. Speech to text conversion is quite advanced, and text to text language translation is also quite good for many purposes, yet home assistants like Google Home, Alexa, Siri, etc, are not very clever at understanding speech. They accept a very simple set of instructions and any deviation from these leads to incomprehension. “Turn the light off and close the blinds” ought to be quite straightforward and yet flummoxes a machine designed only to respond to simple monotonic imperatives. For humans, who have come to rely on large languages, the discipline of small language expression is often difficult. In a higher order languages, with large vocabularies, words may be repeated several times in the same string, and may be combined with others in order to form new concepts; then there is no simple linear decomposition: there is only an ordered sequence of symbols, like a line integral over a field. In the transition from large to small, one may select a subset of a full language so that a small set can masquerade as full language. This presents a risk to interpretation. Consider the language of mathematics, for instance, which uses a subset of English with special jargon so that common meanings are not always honoured. In music, ‘rap’ artists often use words with rhyming associations involving levels of indirect association to convey meaning so someone who has a similar background. A unit of intent, in some language, is now represented as an ordered sequence or path over words in the language, which we can denote by LSR from an agent using LS internally to an agent using LR internally. The co-language understood by both 

bS (LS ) ∩ bR(LR) ∈ LSR . (12) Agents may need to adapt their signalling in order to be understood, and there is nothing that guarantees that intent will be transmitted faithfully, since autonomous agents may have nothing to align them. We can write this schematically as a quasi-functional path integral through the effective space of intentions, to illustrate the semantics and make contact with representations in the mathematics of fields: a language element is a path dependent sequence of elements, contextualized by some ambient context c(p) along the intended path: 

L 7 → P

Z EB

dI c (I) β(I). (13) where β(m) may depend on the position in the message, or the context, and B and E are the beginning and end of the fragment. This traversal of ideas in a ‘semantic spacetime’ is one way to form local knowledge representations [16] and is related to discussions about knowledge maps, and graphs in the Semantic Web [17], [18]. Such knowledge representations suffer from the same problem as their base languages: they do not necessarily match in their intended meanings, because they are structured by some curator’s idea of how things play out. This is the ontology problem [19], [20]. Ontologies work by trying to decompose language into isolated concepts that are unique and separable within some hierarchy of “types”, and are then arranged in some connected ‘spanning tree’, which promises greater significance than can be attributed to it in a fair fight. Mapping and ontology are, in fact, an agent strategy. In practice, such type-inspired decompositions are as non-unique as languages, and yet they offer less expressibility because they have no grammar for composition. So what one gains, in making clear promises between the concepts, is lost by placing unrealistic constraints for the sake of differentiation. This is simply a step backwards from a large and complex language to a smaller simplistic one, with a restricted vocabulary of assigned meanings, that now needs a versioned calibration to match reality. 

> 5

B. Consistency and comprehension of language 

Certain languages, which can promise both the doing and the undoing , i.e. the reversal of some outcome, are useful for enabling self-assessment and consistency of meaning across multiple exchanges. Did I do what I think I did? Did you agree that I did what I think I did? Such languages ensure that each promise has a meaningful and unique inverse. In order for two languages to have consistent intent we must have an intention expressed in language α should have the same meaning in language β, to the best effort: 

bα = Lαβ (bβ ), (14) so that translating back to the original has no effect 

bβ = Lβα (bα) = Lβα (Lαβ (bβ )) , (15) or the reversals are true inverses 

Lβα · Lαβ = I, (16) which means that such a language Lαβ would be unitary. This is a very strong constraint, which is unlikely to be achievable between independent agents without highly stringent accommodations. Thus, in practice, agents should expect to misunderstand one another’s intentions to some level and thus make additional promises to accommodate such misunderstandings, when cooperating 2.Suppose there exist a few multi-valued elements (words with multiple meanings), creating ambiguity of interpretation, then a language clearly cannot be invertible. One way to handle this would be to not rely on single words, but rather expand discourse into unique sentences on a larger scale of explanation. Thus one can approximate an effective unitarity of communication by expanding extent (decompression) 3. This is a risky strategy, because additional words may introduce inconsistency or contradictions as well as clarifications. Again, there is a trade-off between restriction on intent and restriction on constraint language. Finally, language is the important medium for knowledge representation when saving insights for the future or sharing with. As versions of language evolve, stored information may become unreadable or unintelligible. It can also be misunderstood because the unspoken dependency of presumed context, assumed to be “common knowledge” is now missing. If no agent has a clear understanding of the context in which memorized input was relevant, then it becomes a liability. 

C. Comprehension uncertainty 

When we look for keywords, such as directives or signals, in a piece of text, we are extracting intent from the text. The 

> 2In restricted languages, Shannon proved that formal error correction can mitigate poor transmission [13], [14], but not intentional misinterpretation
> 3Readers should not misunderstand this intentionally: an agent does not have a choice about intentionally misinterpreting a message. It projects its own intent to the best of its ability, without presupposing what its own intentions might be. It takes only a small misalignment to end up with a deviation from what was intended by the sender. All agents can act in good faith and still end up with an error.

phrases that trigger promises may be considered ’possible intentions’, i.e. directions in which one could possibly choose to go, or tasks one might undertake. One way to maintain coherence is to limit the common language of by providing a finite menu or directory of cases. This is how a fast food outlet can perform efficiently and mechanically, as compared to a diner in which can order breakfast by personal specification. When the multiplicity of intentions grows large, perhaps forming a quasi continuum (as in human systems), behaviours lose their coherence. The machine-like qualities of robustness and reliability become washed out and effectively ’uninten-tional’ as signal turns to noise. 

Example 3 (Simple signal language): 

Consider a body language with alphabet 

β = {SEND , RECEIVE , SEEK , FORWARD , BACK } (17) and 

β′ = {PUT , GET , APPEND } (18) then we can translate these, referring to (10): 

c′

> 1

β′ 

> 1

= PUT = c1β1 = SEND (19) 

c′

> 2

β′ 

> 2

= GET = c2β2 = RECEIVE (20) 

c′

> 3

β′ 

> 3

= APPEND = c′

> 2

β′ 

> 2

+ c′

> 4

β′ 

> 4

+ c′

> 1

β′

> 1

= SEEK +FORWARD +SEND 

(21) There is a translation matrix: 

La′a =



1 0 0 0 00 1 0 0 01 0 1 1 0

 (22) which, in this case, is not invertible. Hence the language is translatable in one direction only. In principle, however, it should be possible to restrict ℓ(α),such that translation may be performed faithfully as a bijection, by postulating a ‘table of elements’ for the chemistry of all promises in a semantic spacetime: 

ℓ(a) ↔ ℓ(b) ∀ a, b ∈ L . (23) It is not only the language in its entirety that needs to be compatible, but the way each agent uses the language. When dealing with large language models, there is a temptation to believe that agents sharing the same model must automatically understand one another. However, this need not be the case, given that each picks a selection based on its own context (which is autonomous and independent). 

Example 4 (Small vs large): A small language with a selection of words with standard meanings is only standard to its creator. If the receiver doesn’t comprehend what is meant, repeating the same words doesn’t make it clearer. In a larger 

6LL12LL

> 43

Fig. 2: Overlapping patches of language require all agents in a patch to use a compatible language, and for (at least some) agents in each patch to comprehend a faithful translation of a neighbouring language, in order to bring long range order. 

language, the sender can go on in the hope that eventually the right intention will be communicated. However, at some point saying too much could make things worse. Agents can never know when they have reached the optimum without actual a (promise) dialogue and mutual assessment. Autonomous agents are never certain. 

D. Language uncertainty during serial-parallel composition 

The impact of language comprehension at junctions, in-volving a composition of agents into larger structures, where promises depend on one another will multiply as a systemic fault, following the conventional algebra of fault dependencies [21]. 

Example 5 (Component assembly): For instance, a radio is a superagent formed from smaller agents (resistors, capacitors, diodes, etc each of which makes a simple promise); their composition into a circuit is what enables the promise of radio sound. Promises that depend on other agents may be combined serially, or aggregated from parallel upstream promises (see figure 4). RLL1R 

# L2R +b 2

+b 3

+b 1

# L3R 

# R

# +b | b , b , b 1 2 3

Fig. 3: The aggregation of promises to assemble a new (tensor) promise is dependent on the overlap between each pair of agents, which involves language uncertainty LiR and measure uncertainty 

b(+)  

> i

∩b(−) 

> Ri

.

These configurations each lead to their own uncertainties. Figure figure 3 combines a number of inputs into a single promise dependent on all. If the inputs are redundant sources, then the dependent promise has a resilience. However, if each is a different independent input, such as data from a unique sensor, then the output becomes fragile in proportion to the promise that aggregates them. 

Si

> +bi

−−→ RR −b′

> i

−−→ Si

R b | b1,b 2,b 3... 

−−−−−−−−→ ? (24) Each agent forms its autonomous assessment of the intention conveyed in a received promise, and replaces it entirely with its own promise. Ultimately, it cannot be regulated or controlled without establishing an agreed configuration in advance. For instance, when a collection of agents is composed into a new superagent (such as a radio from transistors, resistors etc), then there is a master agent providing a calibrating design for the construction. The participating component agents basically agree to subordinate themselves to this design. In a human organization, one attempts to replicate this into a collaborative workflow, but humans (with their many concerns and distractions) may change their minds or fail to keep rigid promises required for such predictability. Generally, the more complex or high the level of the agent and its interior processes, the less predictable and reliable a collaboration will be 4.S I R

Fig. 4: Cooperation in parallel and in series presents different challenges, each with their own uncertainty. 

In the serial case of figure 4, which represents a relay station or supply chain: 

S +bS

−−→ II −bS′

−−−→ SI +bS′′ | bS′

−−−−−−−→ RI +bS′

−−−→ RR −bS′′ 

−−−→ I (25) The intermediate agent becomes the chief suspect when transmission of intent from S to R fails. How can we interpret the promise body sets: bS = bS′ = bS′′ ? An intermediate agent can always inject or distort a message, either deliberately or unwittingly. The language problem is one aspect of this; timing delays and sampling distortions are another. What can we expect of an ensemble of agents interacting.  

> •

The potential inhomogeneity of the agents (in both capability and comprehension) is in play. Do they share a common language and will they understand the same words in the same way?  

> •

Autonomy implies that any agent can inject its own intentions at any stage, so we cannot automatically assume that an autonomous agent is a faithful servant. 

> 4Daniel Mezick remarks on an aphorism by Stuart Kauffman: ‘Work is the release of energy through a few degrees of freedom’, i.e. there are enabling constraints (an explosion through a gun barrel turns an undirected energy release into an intentional force). Constraint is, in fact, the architect of intention, and language is its language!

7Example 6 (Law and ontology): Limiting of vocabulary to avoid uncertainty is what lawyers and ontologists try to do. This is a difficult job, requiring much effort, so many human agents will try to avoid it and improvise their way to a resolution, building on ‘stigmeric’ or commonly established norms (see below), rather than specific promises. Creating a limited vocabulary language has the further impact of making something domain specific masquerading as something ordinary. 

E. Autonomous agents appear non-deterministic 

Even if agents act deterministically, within their interiors, the outcomes of their promised actions, as measured by others must occur non-deterministically . This is a consequence of the Nyquist-Shannon sampling law [13], [14], and we shall use it below in connection with trust and risk. Consider, once again, the promises in (7). The rate at which an agent can listen for and receive messages, in order to respond, depends its interior capabilities and resources. This becomes important when discussing trust, since it is the fundamental limitation that affects the way agents perceive one another. By the sampling law [13], [14] 

“If a function x(t) contains no frequencies higher than B, then it can be completely determined from its sampled values at a sequence of points spaced less than 1/(2 B) time intervals apart.” 

Thus, in order to assess the promise from S, with perfect fidelity, R has to sample (i.e. be paying attention) at twice the rate at which S may send. Again, for a single promise, this is plausible. However, in a larger network, it becomes paradoxical. If all the agents were to be similar in capability, then every agent would have to sample twice as fast as every other, which is impossible. Conversely, if they all sample at their own rate, there is necessarily a finite chance of missing a signal or or misunderstanding a message. Error correction can be applied to the message, to restore its integrity, only if the sampling frequency is already adequate and may result in a delay. What appears to be one agent may be resolved into several independent agents working together. An agent that appears to keep a number of different and unrelated promises might actually be inferred to consist of a number of independent agents. Autonomous agents have no a priori homogeneity. Homogeneity, in general, arises only by calibration to a single calibration source, or “standard candle”. 

F. Intended purpose, free will 

A note is warranted, concerning use of the terms ‘intended meaning’ or ‘intended purpose’, which for some readers will naturally bring up the contentious philosophical issue of ‘free will’. Some believe that free will is a quality reserved specifically for humans, and that intentionality is related to questions about consciousness. To begin with, we can try to define these terms more clearly: 

Definition 3 (Intent): A selection of a single course of action, whose outcome satisfies certain constraints, amongst a number of possible alternatives. 

Definition 4 (Free will): The ability for an agent to make its own selection from a number of self-assembled alternatives, without interference from other agents. 

Definition 5 (Consciousness): The ability for an agent to assess and reason about its own state along side the state of its environment and compose a catalogue of possible alternatives. Notice that free will doesn’t claim that agents cannot listen to each other’s input. The only mysterious part of this is where a catalogue of possible alternatives may come from and whether it is fully deterministic and predictable. Promise Theory reveals that a system composed of agents can never be deterministic, because of finite sampling. Intent (which has an independent meaning to consciousness, but which may rely on it) relates to a cognitive awareness of an agent’s situation and the assessment of possible options. Intent is thus related to an agent’s ‘direction of travel’ in some space of possibility 5.The same is true for any entity that makes a dynamic choice. The extent to which an agent acts fully autonomously, or with complete freedom, varies enormously with it circumstances. In a sense, the possibilities for future choice are all present in an agent’s environment and internal state. The selection of a specific choice may be deterministically made, but nevertheless appear mysterious and free of influence just as long as we do not see the process by which the selection was made. As long as intentions come from within, in the final instance, they appear to be autonomously and freely made. This is true for humans too. The extent to which an agent can think or make decisions freely is a an elaborate illusion, shrouded in complexity. It should not surprise us that simple agent mechanisms can execute processes that make pre-existing selections, e.g. the automatic transmission (gearbox) in a car can select from a menu of gear ratios in a static environment, and even be cajoled into changing gears in response to a human tweaking its sensors. Going further, an agent with much more sophisticated information, within a significantly more complex environment with stigmergic trails from earlier generations leading it in different directions, can easily select opportunities that are latent within that dynamical environment, giving the appearance of magical innovation. The self assessment of intentions leads to this kind of surprise: a system may be ripe with the (+) promise of possibilities, and yet we only pay attention (-) to a small part of them, due to our cognitive budgeting [22]. For agents with ‘emotional’ judgements, i.e. the ability to form quick and dirty ‘low information’ responses, which attract or repel the agent from certain scenarios, a functional ‘intent’ 

> 5For elementary machines, intent is simply a proxy for some human’s intent. However, this view quickly becomes cumbersome. A table, once fashioned, promises to hold items and form a surface for arranging other items. A door handle promises to open and close a door. These promises remain true even after the original inventor is long gone.
> 8

already has a hardwired component. Emotional signalling is an effective strategy for fast reasoning [23] and plays a key role in human reasoning selection. Emotional communication is, like body language, an additional dimension to expression that machines fail to grasp (as do some humans). The deeper question of whether an agent could alter a purpose that was assigned to it is then something like the question: can someone take on a new job? If all its possible intentions are pathways to possible existing outcomes, but not all are clear in its attention, then this is really a question of how to allocate a cognitive budget to navigate those unexplored avenues. An agent that spends time introverted in self-examination will discover more of those opportunities than one that spends most of its budget responding to external stimuli. The decision to select an ‘non-programmed action’ is not in question. The ‘free choice’ is simply a selection from a largely unexplored menu of pathways, initiated from within. Assuming we can agree sufficiently to shape norms for the use of artificial agents, policing the future will be an interesting challenge. One can only enforce laws if a majority basically already believes in them. What we mean by ‘intentionality’ is the ability of an agent to select from alternative next steps, thus aligning an interior process to an outcome in some semantic representation. The more complex the representation, the more nuanced the intentions may appear to be. The intent to switch on a light may be a simple binary choice, but the intention to persuade someone to knit a sweater encompasses many more possible variables (degrees of freedom). The notion of intent as a manifestation of free will is already contentious, but what we experience as free will is likely only an emotionally satisfying illusion, resulting from a highly complex semantic representation of our immediate situation, rooted in on-going cognitive experience. The self-assessment each agent makes of its past, present and future involves timeline information, much of which is encoded in the placement of objects and other agents around it. The claim that “I did it in purpose”, i.e. of free will, is simply the identification that one of the possible outcomes was selected, based on situational criteria that an observer was not necessarily paying conscious attention to 6. It is the result of complex policies and emotional resonance, not magic. V. T RUST AND ITS CONSEQUENCES 

Like free will, trust plays a surprising and somewhat unexpected role in agent systems. On a human level, we have a rough intuitive understanding of what trust means, but only as a moral concept. The morality of trust is something of a smokescreen for its pragmatic function. Trust manifestly underpins an agent’s sense of reliability (trustworthiness), i.e. the assessment that promises will be kept and thus the expected reliability of cooperation. Notice that 

> 6Some communication is made in jest or speculation: we say things we don’t mean intentionally to provoke a scenario, even to showcase the counterfactual horror of an alternative to what is intended.

‘expectation’ implies something probabilistic and thus there is something non-deterministic at work already. No agent has perfect information, so each interaction is a sort of cooperative game [24]–[26]. Perhaps surprisingly, the importance of trust encompasses machine interactions too by looking past the moral smokescreen. In the scope of Promise Theory, we can also formalize that notion of a reliable relationship in purely pragmatic operational terms, in such a way that the limiting case of human level promises matches our common intuitions [27], [28]. Trust has two components: trustworthiness and kinetic trust. Trustworthiness works like an attractive force between agents that obviously keep their promises, and as a repulsive force away from those that obviously don’t. In the contentious region between these extremes, there is a kinetic component to ‘keep checking’ if promises are kept, i.e. dynamical process of oversight.  

> •

Trustworthiness : the sum history of prior interactions with an agent and its promises is boiled down to a potential V

for being able to depend on an agent. This may include reputational information passed on as hearsay. This is used to determine whether we engage or not with an agent. For example, the ability to rely on a trusted infrastructure is a key strategy to save everyone the cost of entry into society. Roads, sanitation, and electrical power, etc, are all under the radar as far as promises are concerned—at least for most of us.  

> •

Rate of satisfaction : If the agents passes the potential trustworthiness ‘entry test’, then trust moves on to a second ‘kinetic’ stage, in which we decide the rate at which we monitor progress: is the promise kept quickly enough? How closely we should follow what they are doing for us? If we trust them completely, we don’t need to look at all. If we are suspicious of their intentions, we monitor them closely and sample their outputs frequently. Trust is thus an economic issue at its heart. We trust promises, because to mistrust them would require us to do work to monitor and verify them. This gives a clue that trust is really a form of work or energy in the physics sense. 

A. Work and effort 

Trust is in fact a currency, measured like energy, based on dimensional arguments [27]. To see this, we begin by noting that making and receiving promises is an activity that costs work: negotiating language and getting to know an agent’s capabilities is a trust building activity, which is not gratis. The length of the promise message is associated with an amount of work, since it takes resources of the agent to form it, transmit it, decode it, etc. Given that the message is about a promise to be kept, which also involves an investiture of work to fulfill, there is some risk involved and we must now distinguish the work of signalling promises from the work of keeping promises. If work is imposed without prior signalling, it might be ignored or result in conflict. Each transmission from an agent is a tick of the process clock associated with the message, and each promise kept 

> 9

event is a tick of the clock associated with the cooperation between agents. Something can only happen between the agents if both the sender and the receiver overlap in their attempts to exchange something. 

B. Trust and risk 

For autonomous agents. depending on other agents is a gamble, in the sense that they can only wait for some agent somewhere upstream to deliver an outcome that we need—they cannot require or demand it. At best, they can walk away and look elsewhere. The downstream principle ultimately tells us that this reliance is an autonomous gamble: a forsaken agent could have sought out redundant sources for its key needs. However, often, there might not be obvious alternatives, so agents choose to accept this risk. When deciding to enter into a dependency relationship, there is a potential cost associated with the work wasted effort. We can associate this work with the trust in agents’ reliability 

in promise keeping. As an energy process, trust has two components: potential trustworthiness, i.e. the likelihood that an agent will keep its promise, and kinetic mistrust or the rate at which we check on the agent to make sure it is complying with its stated intentions [27]. Potential trust is an assessment , based on an accumulation of past experience. In social networks, it may even be passed around as reputation. In low level technical systems, agents cannot make sophisticated assessments, and often have no option but to start with a 50-50 guess about trustworthiness, which might be upgraded or downgraded later. Referring once again to the basic promise interaction in (7), we denote the potential for S to keep its promise to R, as follows: 

VS = αR(π(+)  

> S

), (26) i.e. it is an assessment by R of S’s output level. The measurement units are not important for now, since they will eventually be absorbed into dimensionless ratios, such as probabilities. The receiver R can now also assess its own efforts in accepting the promise as a calibration (which is effectively choosing units of measurement) 

VR = αR(π(−) 

> R

), (27) giving a potential trustworthiness difference 

∆V = VR − VS . (28) By dimensional analysis of the rates for activity [27], this is equivalent to a kinetic velocity of sampling v by 

∆V 7 → 12 ρv 2, (29) where ρ is an effective mass involvement parameter, whose units are again arbitrary and will cancel or be absorbed into other definitions. What matters is the relative tempo: the less trustworthy an agent is assessed as being, with respect to its promise, the greater the probable rate of checking warranted by the receiver (figure 5). SRVV ρv221

Fig. 5: A potential difference (assessed trustworthiness) acts like an incentive to begin kinetic sampling of the other party, and thus drives work. 

Uncertainty thus drives increased kinetic sampling, which costs work-energy like the square of the sampling rate. The function of trust is thus to reduce the overhead of managing a promise dependency. If the receiver invests only a lower rate of checking, then it effectively accepts a certain risk as part of its work budget: 

∆V = 12 ρv 2 + RISK , (30) with sampling rate that varies like the square root of potential difference: 

v =

s

2( VR − VS − RISK )

ρ . (31) This verifying by sampling is relatively inexpensive (a square root) compared to complete loss of trust or accepting risk, especially as the potential values of the trustworthiness becomes significant. Agents that can rely on a regular promised delivery can minimize their cost expenditure. If trust in a supplier is greater than our own ability to receive quickly, then the potential difference is negative and the agent needn’t check at all (figure 6). Note that VS is R’s estimation of S’s budget allocation for delivering the promise outcome, which is a kind of administrative oversight. It is not the internal work expended to keep the promise πS , which may be much greater. Thus, trust/risk rate selection provides for an autonomous measure response to minimize overhead cost as a risk policy—a form of self-protection against being let down. SRVV (interior work) (exterior work) 

Fig. 6: An agent seeing insufficient relative trustworthiness would continue its own internal kinetic work without interacting. 10 Example 7 (AI trust): Artificial Intelligence is not immune to trust issues. The effectively limitless rate at which machines can sample and measure each other and humans, means that there is no upper limit on the amount of energy an artificial autonomous system may choose to invest in surveillance of its neighbours. A battery powered autonomous vehicle will thus budget for trust differently than a datacentre-hosted autonomous service, which expects to be promised unconditional energy. VI. C OLLECTIVE ACTION 

We can now bring together the various issues to address the matter of cooperation as a form of collective action [29]. A number of elementary agents make promises in such a way that they participate in a collective process, which effectively makes a higher level promise. By making promises, the agents in a collaboration forego part of their autonomy for the benefit of the collective [30]. This involves promises to accomplish various organizational properties:  

> •

Normative behaviour (foregoing autonomous privilege).  

> •

Structural collaboration (formation of hierarchy).  

> •

Calibration and agreement (establishing authority). I these, the role of individual and collective memory is important. 

A. Stigmergy: exterior memory and common knowledge 

In practice, agents interacting within some scenario, also benefit from cognitive (sensory) information around them. Not all memory of past progress lives inside us: some is deposited into the environment to be rediscovered later. This means they have access to an ambient context and potentially shared knowledge. Agents, that have worked together with others previously, may have memories of prior interactions, and these may be passed on as part of a society in which knowledge is retained. There is a tendency to assume that memory must be on an agent’s interior, but nearly all agents in the natural world modify the environment around them to form memories: from the trails left by ants to nests and other building structures. Agents make use of environmental or common knowledge, and make use of stigmergic information left behind by earlier processes. Since this information is now independent of them, and effectively promises to persist thanks to third parties, agents may promise to accept and depend on it. While this opens them to security vulnerabilities, it is eminently practical, especially in the natural world. For example, we know that ants and other insects leave intentional trails for others to follow—yet we rarely realize that humans do the same by building roads and infrastructure, indeed write books and tell stories and pass rumours, which are then tacitly used to underpin their cooperation. Constraint works best when it is accepted voluntarily. In other words, when constraints are promised autonomously, they are more likely to be kept than if agents are manipulated into accepting an imposed constraint, perhaps on the incentive of another promise. It’s interesting to note how humans tend to eschew formal arrangements and constraints as inconvenient extra work. With humans, conventions and societal norms are frequently used to avoid making every detail of an interaction explicit. It is “simply understood” that people will behave in a certain way, invoking trust. Clearly, this is exposed to potential exploitation, but certain cultures that have comfortable existence can operate in this way. The antidote to taking such information for granted is to delegate the task to specialized agents: legal texts attempt to detail explicitly the specific cases, in much the way that a computer program enumerates cases in explicit detail. 

B. Authority, calibrated subordination, and hierarchy 

How can we coordinate delegated purpose? Hierarchy cannot be imposed onto autonomous agents, yet hierarchies can be formed by voluntarily cooperation, e.g. as semantic or economic imperatives. Agents may be multi-capable, or they may be differentiated specifically to perform a particular service 7. When agents work towards a differentiated task, they have quite specific intentions. Leadership is a calibration role, i.e. a simple way to encode standard information, on which agents depend, in a single ‘location’. A leader need not be a single agent (a “boss’), it can be an entity, a trail to follow, a signal, a compass direction, a proposed standard of behaviour, e.g. a “rule”, indeed any singular thing that rallies agents collectively. Leadership is connected to the concept of authority [31], which is closely related to the dynamics of trust. By assigning a special role to a particular agent, one has the effect of calibrating a single source of intent as a trusted source. This leads to an effective subordination of follower agents. By promising to follow a leader, agents give up some of their autonomy voluntarily. The economics of this may be complex. Establishing the promises that tie agents together involves some protocol, which expends work that is turned into potential trust. The result is a collection of promises by all parties that we call a ‘contract’ 8.

C. Cooperation involving proxy agents 

An important case to consider is how agents delegate tasks to one another to form a collective that operates with machine-like assurance. This is because it is the basic pattern for service delivery, turning autonomous capability into a business model. The language of ‘client’ and ‘server’ roles is common in the Information Technology industry, but one can also imagine a process of online ordering, with a delivery agent as proxy. A server has to promise a client delivery, but conditionally on the behaviour of the proxy. As this is a conditional promise, the service agent also has to promise its interaction with the 

> 7Stem cells quickly turn into cells with a specific role during morphogenesis on one level, but produce animals that are basically similar. Humans find their calling in different professions and interests, whereas birds have rather similar lives day by day.
> 8Note, many authors misuse the notion of a contract with that of a promise by assuming that agents trade obligations they MUST fulfil. This is not possible for autonomous agents.
> 11

delivery agent to the end client, and so on. Below, I follow the discussion from [3]. Consider the case of a service which promises a client some outcome, e.g. ordering a book online, or asking a chat interface for an answer through some knowledge base. The front-end service agent, originally some sender S, wishes to delegate the task of delivery to a proxy or intermediary P . Since the agents are autonomous, we have no assurances about how they will behave, so we seek promises to act in a manner conducive to a maximally certain outcome. The number of promise is perhaps surprising, because we take such matters for granted in daily life: the relationships between agents is often hidden in legal contracts, design documents, or computer code. Let’s try to enumerate them, with a mutually calibrating pattern. Even though the process outcome is a directed transfer from server to client, these dependencies follow each agent symmetrically around the collaboration [3] (see figure 7). The server promises Proxy Server Client −E(P) +E(P) −P(E) +P(E) +E,−P −E,+P 

Fig. 7: Assured delivery on a promise through a proxy. delivery. 

the client end-state E: ‘You will have package’ and this is conditional on ‘if the delivery agent promises πP ’. The Server also promises to use a promise to delivery the package from a proxy, where P is ‘Deliver package to Client ’. 

πE : Server +E|P

−−−−→ Client 

πP : Server −P

−−→ Client 

 ≡ Server +E(P )

−−−−→ Client . (32) i.e. a shorthand for ‘I will deliver the end-state if some proxy helps me +E|P , and I promise you that I am accepting such help −P ’, which looks like a function E(P ), for ‘end-state depending on my proxy’. This promise from the server to the client represents a virtual interface between the two, which could not be represented at all in the push-imposition model. It represents is the effective promise from the server to the client, and the client accepts. The full collaboration now takes the form: 

Server +E(P )

−−−−→ Client (33) 

Server −P, +E

−−−−−→ Proxy (34) 

Proxy +P, −E

−−−−−→ Server (35) 

Proxy +P (E)

−−−−→ Client (36) 

Client −E(P )

−−−−→ Server (37) 

Client −P (E)

−−−−→ Proxy (38) Notice the symmetries between ± in the promise collaboration of equilibrium state, and between E, P indicating the comple-mentarity of the promises. The Server promises its client ‘I will give you E if the delivery agent promises you P ’. The delivery agent says ‘I will deliver P if I receive E from the Server’. Both agencies are promising the client something that requires them to work together, and the only different between them from the client’s viewpoint is the realization of how the promises are kept. 1) In (33) and (37) the Server promises to deliver the end-state E via the proxy delivery agent. 2) To accomplish this, the Server promises to hand over 

+E to the proxy, and the proxy promises to accept such transactions −E in (34). 3) The Proxy promises the Server that is can deliver +P

to the client in (35). 4) In (36), the delivery agent promises to deliver what it received from the Server +P (E), because it needs confirmation −P (E) from the client in (38) that it is okay to deliver, assuming that the promised end state 

πE was kept, or equivalently that it will deliver when the client makes its pull request to acquire the state. If this is not a one-off transaction, but a continuous working relationship covering multiple deliveries, the continuous deliv-ery and maintenance of E across a single intermediary agent is assured. The proof of continuity may be seen by noting that no promise can terminate, because its work is never done. Moreover, if any promise is not kept, the continuation of the promise assures that best effort will maintain the repair of the situation. We can summarize this behaviour by a thumb rule: 

When a system promises continuous operation, none of the promises may become invalid or be removed from the picture as a result of a failure to keep any promise, i.e. promises are described for all times and conditions, in a continuous steady state. 

Generalizing to N intermediaries in a logistic chain, such as one finds in a delivery chain or transport routing, make be done by induction. The case for three proxies is shown in figure 8: 

Server ±S(P1(P2(P3))) 

−−−−−−−−−−→ Client (39) 

Server ±S

−−→ Proxy 1 (40) 

Server ±P1(P2(P3)) 

←−−−−−−−− Proxy 1 (41) 

Proxy 1  

> ±P1(S)∧(P2(P3))

−−−−−−−−−−−−→ Client (42) 

Proxy 1

> ±P1(S)

−−−−−→ Proxy 2 (43) 

Proxy 1

> ±P2(P3)

←−−−−− Proxy 2 (44) 

Proxy 2  

> ±P2(P1(S)) ∧(P3)

−−−−−−−−−−−−→ Client (45) 

Proxy 2

> ±P2(P1(S))

−−−−−−−→ Proxy 3 (46) 

Proxy 2

> ±P3

←−−− Proxy 3 (47) 

Proxy 3

> ±P3(P2(P1(S)))

−−−−−−−−−−→ Client (48) 

> 12

Compare (39) with (48) and observer the symmetry. Then observe how the symmetry moves along the list of intermedi-aries through the list from top to bottom or vice versa. Apart from promises to the client, which are always in the same direction, promises move both up and down along the chain, and each step exchanges a forward promise for a equivalent reverse promise, e.g. compare (40) and (47). The promises containing the AND ( ∧ ) symbol indicate that the promises made by the proxies to the client are conditional on two other promises, except for the final last-mile proxy, i.e. that they are in receipt of the good or service from upstream, and that they have obtained a promise from another proxy agent downstream to deliver in its behalf. 1P

> 2

P

> 3

P      

> ++
> +
> +P3+P (P )) 23+S+P (P (P ))) 123+ P (S) 1+P (P (S)) 12+

SC

> 3
> S(P (P (P ))) 21
> P (...) (...) P (...) (...)
> 22
> 5
> 123
> P (P (P (S)))

Fig. 8: Graphical view of a three intermediary promise chain. the promises in rectangular boxes along the chain move down the chain from server S to proxy P3 handing over the service itself. The oval promises are directed back up the chain providing delivery assurances. Finally, each agent promises independently with the end-point or client that it is an authorized agent for delivering the promise from the source (server). 

This example represents the extreme end of obtaining maximum certainty through signalling of intent—and yet it is the very pattern that governs most societal level interactions offered by businesses and public institutions. For continuous delivery scenarios, this represents the minimum level of assurance for a process to be fully managed. The result is a law for assurance through proxies: the cost of fully promised continuous end-to-end delivery grows O(N 2) in the number of intermediary agents. A chain of trust in this picture is implicit in this picture. Al-though the information about the promises made by P1, . . . P N

is passed by to S through the use-promises moving backwards along the chain, S has no direct communication with them. It would not be able to detect if P1 distorted the promise made by P2, for example. One could add further promises from each of the proxies directly to S about how what they intend to do with the good/service they are delivering, e.g. 

Proxy N

> ±PN

−−−→ Server (49) Then the promise to the client would be modified to 

Server ±S(P1(P2(P3))) ∧ (P1) ∧ (P2) ∧ (P3)

−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−→ Client (50) In many real world situations one opts to trust because this cost of tracking and verifying becomes too much to understand and follow up. Notice that the precise promises πP1 . . . π PN have not been specified and can easily be reinterpreted without any further ado to include a transformation of the original sender service. Clearly, in the case of minimal trust, the promise graph has to be a complete graph, with every agent promising every other its intention to play its part. This shows explicitly how much coordination in, in fact, needed to corral autonomous behaviour into a collective purpose. In the worst case one could make no promises between agents and ‘see what happens’, but this impacts the trust from the client, and may lead to agents going elsewhere (by the Downstream Principle). The usefulness of documenting and making these promises lies in seeing how information about agents’ intentions needs to flow, and where potential points of failure might occur due to a lack of responsiveness in keeping the promises. This is a part of the stigmergic design. 

D. Agreement and contracts 

Promises are a one-sided statement of intent that implies no reciprocation or obligation on the part of any agent. Contracts are agreements formed from many bilateral promises [3]. Building conditional loops of mutually agreeable promises then leads to a contract, which can be assessed by each party ready for agreement. The language of the promises must be intelligible by all parties and the language of execution must be compatible with the contract. There is a possibility that a promise πS is delivered perfectly, but that πR is unable or unwilling to receive the offer. S may then deplete its resources without receiving anything in return. This is a risk that each agent takes. Again, Promise Theory tells us that the failure may result from: i) a semantic misalignment, or ii) a measure deviation from the norm. Language is the bottleneck. 

Example 8 (Contract law): In legal communications, lan-guage semantics are a major source of fragility—in a similar way to the way certain organisms require a specific type of non-poisonous food to thrive. The type of input may be a critical dependency as well as the amount of it. 

Example 9 (Chatbots): In artificial intelligence we rely a lot on language to carry meaning, because it is a simple one dimensional form of discrete symbolic information. Almost every other sensory experience involves greater computational complexity to decipher. Contracts are not merely documents of intent: they embody a slow process of drawing up promises for consideration, then countering these with other promises to respond in case of a breach of trust, and so on. This kinetic work involved in defining this process is part of what builds trust and lays the foundation for the administration of the eventual relationship. The entire collection of promises, for all parties, is agreed to when each party ‘signs’ the contract, promising their approval of the arrangement. Humans may famously try to impose their own advantages into such agreements, and it is the downstream 

> 13

responsibility of the other party to counter such impositions to stabilize a balanced relationship. SR

> tacit imposition common knowledge

Fig. 9: When we deal with agents that operate on a high level, like humans in the workplace, most singular promises are made in an ambient environment that’s already filled with promises and perceived obligations (tacit impositions) as a matter of ’common knowledge’. This can make it difficult to resolve exactly what an agent should be trying to do. 

E. Normative teams and swarms 

Collaborations in which several agents combine their promised capabilities need some constraints to shape their efforts. 

Definition 6 (Swarm): An ensemble of agents, which are basically similar, and has no leader. Behaviours are quite simple and undifferentiated, leading to emergent patterns. Swarms tend to act to reduce their behavioural footprint, i.e. the total amount of information (staying close together) rather than spreading out to explore all of space and time [11], [12]. Notice that ‘swarm’ is a role associated with flying, not an identity. The agents comprising a collection of insects behave very differently once inside a hive, where differentiated roles are clearer. If agents fall into well defined differentiated roles, with clear promises, then we tend to call the collaboration a team [32]. The allusion to microservices [33] in technology is a team structure applied to information technology. If we consider the promises in equation (7), and assume that there is a countable set of N outcomes for this exchange, representing the configuration space of the promises: 

bS ∩bR 7 → { b1, b 2, . . . , b N } , (51) then, over time, sampling these outcomes will lead to a probability distribution pi, where i = 1 . . . N , with entropy 

H = −

> N

X

> i=1

pi log pi. (52) This leads to a menu of items or a spectral representation for the promises ( bi may be called the spectrum of the promise). In the case of an insect swarm, a flock or a herd, the bi are configurations in physical space. For computer networks with drifting configurations, they are discrete digital states. When there is a larger collection of agents and many promises, the combinatorics of promise keeping quickly become uncountably large unless promises can be restricted semantically 9.

F. Feedback and rewards 

An agent may expect some form of remuneration for its efforts. If for no other reason, each agent has to sustain itself. In every promise relation, it is understood that the resources (energy) to keep an agent alive must be supplied from within. How this is managed is a problem to be solved by the agents’ own promises 10 .An autonomous agent cannot impose blame, so a strategy for self-protection is autonomously backing away from a bad relationship. Agents can also try to influence the supplier of a promise they rely on, by providing feedback, in order to sustain the relationship. We are now in the territory of Axelrod games [25], [26]. The supplier agent is under no obligation to pay attention to its ’customer’ feedback, but this is clearly an advantage for sustaining a relationship. Apart from the actual acceptance promise π(−) 

> R

(π(+)  

> S

), there are two kinds of feedback from R to S an agent might offer.  

> •

Assessment : The result of its assessment αR(πS ), based on the accepted spectral result bR∩bS .

πS : S +bS |αR(πS )

−−−−−−−−→ RπR : R −bR

−−−→ SπF (+) : R +αR(πS )

−−−−−−→ SπF (−) : S −α′

> R

−−−→ R. (53) Notice that a complete interaction assumes both that feedback is volunteered and accepted. Assessment is every agent’s semantic vulnerability, because this where it makes decisions, and may therefore be tricked or manipulated by other agents.  

> •

Remuneration : Some kind of trade or remuneration in exchange for the service rendered—after all, the service might be expensive to provide. 

πS : S +bS |(payment >price )

−−−−−−−−−−−−→ RπR : R −bR

−−−→ SπF (+) : R +payment |bR

−−−−−−−→ SπF (−) : S −price 

−−−→ R. (54) This circular dependency chain must be bootstrapped by one agent acting unconditionally. Someone takes the risk of promising to deliver before payment has been received. In this example, the ‘monetary tokens’ for remuneration are an independent form of exchange to the energy required to empower the agent to carry out bS : there may be several separate budgets that each autonomous agent is responsible for 

> 9In CFEngine, the constraints were built into the domain specific considera-tions of the computer. In human systems, conventions, laws, and other legal texts are the constrain language.
> 10 We can contrast this with a command and control approach: “Stand up straight, soldier!”, “About turn, march!”, “Get this done by Monday!”

14 balancing [34]. That is a design issue, or an evolutionary solution. However, this kind of exchange is effective in biological systems for maintaining stable relationships: single celled organisms have to forage for food themselves, while higher organisms have organized complex vascular systems to delegate power supply to distributed mitochondria. There are ways for agents to game the use of feedback to maximize scores or returns. How do simple agents know enough to game anything? Such skills depend on their interior capabilities; sometimes the evolutionary processes of the environment offer that effectively as a service by natural selection. We needn’t expand more here. Simple numerical scoring is a transparent attempt to game such feedback. If one builds user satisfaction into human-machine collaboration, as a background channel for collaborative success, one begins to approach human levels of behaviour, for better or for worse. Because assessments are entirely subjective, and agents may respond to them however they are disposed to, the manipulation of assessments remains the chief area for gaming and manipulating agents. Humans may be tricked into an exploitative situation, or trapped in slavery trying to balance relative jeopardies of a social system. 

Example 10 (Swarms and herd): A swarm, in the natural world, typically offers each agent in the collective broadly the same promises: a protection against danger (predators), a hedge against getting lost or separated from the group, a promise of mating opportunity. It thus stabilizes the semantics of the collective with ‘norms’. The effect of swarming is to reduce the total information on the space of outcome configurations. This is cost reducing, by the criteria above, though staying close together also possibly makes it easier for predators to locate. What is the point of providing feedback assessment in a risky interaction for autonomous agents that don’t have to change if they don’t choose to? Autonomy implies that there are no guarantees of improvement: agents may experience loss and failure whether they try to avoid it or not. Does it really help to monitor and take the time to communicate expectations? Evidence from the Agile and gaming community would suggest that it does [35], [36]. The answer, for an autonomous entity, has to boil down to whatever advantage it acquires through its own voluntary cooperation. There may be short term advantages and long term advantages, which an agent learns according to its memory resources. This brings us to an autonomous quality: a desire to self-improve. 

G. Pride in work, emotional measures 

A form of feedback that we understand in human society is the service questionnaire. A satisfied customer feeds a sense of pride of work, which plays an important role in how services are rendered. Pride in our work is a ‘value’ that plays to ethical and moral concerns, but it may have pragmatic value too. The desire to please, and thus receive positive feedback, is a strategy for investing in future interactions, to build trust and even to feed an emotional need to be seen is a part of what keeps society together. Society has its own benefits, by providing services and infrastructure thanks to agent organization. Machine recognition of humour, pranking, sarcasm, etc is very limited, yet these modes of communication are quite important to humans. They regulate cooperation and signal subtle motivations, as much as body language does. The tendency for machinery to emulate human characteristics is a seductive technical challenge, yet it is entirely possible that maintaining a clear distinction between human and machine is the preferred approach. In the industrial factory work, which transformed the modern economy, the goal is to purposely 

dehumanize work (to suppress human concerns and make people work like machines). This makes it easier to understand repeatability, quality, and standards. This strategy is what made the modern economy successful and led to consistent production standards. Reversing this out of intellectual curiosity, or misplaced morals, may be a step backwards. 

H. Convergence to desired or intended state 

So, with all these uncertainties, how can we steer cooperative systems built from standalone components (autonomous agents) to work together in a predictable and trustworthy manner? First, we have to allow for the possibility of misunderstandings and unkept promises from the start and adopt a strategy of autonomous self-correction 11 .Clear certainty of outcome is simplest to define in low level systems, with few moving parts. As systems scale to many agents and many parameters, the shifting shape of a parameter space becomes impossible to foresee. One strategy is thus to keep agents (humans and machines) and their operational promise languages as simple as possible. This is essentially the industrial factory model. 

Example 11 (CFEngine): The autonomous agent CFEngine [1], [10] engineered a high degree of certainty into promised outcomes by designing a co-language for system policy based on mathematical fixed points, colloquially called convergence. The convergence criteria was applied by an authorized operator language. For each promise π accepted by the receiver host, the initial state of the system |q⟩ is transformed by a well-defined path to the policy compliant or promised state |qπ ⟩ by a simple iteratively safe map: 

ˆπ |q⟩ 7 → |qπ ⟩ attractor (55) 

ˆπ |qπ ⟩ 7 → |qπ ⟩ fixed point . (56) This was contrasted with the one-shot imposition of remedial actions by remote administrators, without detailed operational knowledge. On a human level, constraining one’s behaviour by making too many promises feels risky or even unhelpful. When tasked 

> 11 Imperatives to favour goals can be etched indelibly into systems (like DNA) by design. If not, they will tend to be eroded by software and input/output concerns.
> 15

to speak clearly, in an unfamiliar restricted language, many will resort to relying on ambient context and societal norms to avoid the effort of formulating something alien to their norms. They would then need to invest effort in self-monitoring (see figure 9), which is an unwanted cost. Thus we see why people will tend to default to trust over reliability. 

Example 12 (LLM agents): Chatbots present an interesting case, as something in between simply machinery and human operator, because they have non-trivial promise languages. One instructs them with “prompts”, which are clearly commands on some level. However, as with humans and language, the commands are broad enough and open to interpretation so that an agent does not respond with a precisely predictable response. The mapping between language and outcome is not a simple lookup in a menu or directory. The nature of the prompt is thus more like a vague bounding constraint on expectations, i.e. a (-) promise to accept what the agent is already configured to offer. One may compensate by lengthening the prompts to try to paper over the ambiguities, but it remains a non-deterministic intention. What makes chatbots risky is that they may have no limits on their resources. VII. H UMAN -M ACHINE SOCIETY 

From collectives acting in unison, we ultimately reach the notion of an integrated society of humans and machinery, with all possible levels of cognitive and reasoning ability. This is a topic much too large for this summary, but I’ll try to sketch a few points. The term society conjures a vision of ensembles of agents co-existing, building shared structures, trading favours, joining tenancies, and queueing for coffee—unified by some sense of purpose [37], [38]. However, we can also include non-human actors in societies: horses, work animals, machinery, etc. Computer gaming has established artificial societies on some level, but with agents that are tightly controlled to maintain a game narrative. The rapidly advancing artificial intelligence experiments will move this to a new level in which agents can easily become more difficult to govern as their autonomous capabilities push in unexpected directions. How many agents does it take to build a society? The answer to this is conventionally based on Dunbar numbers for group sizes. Human societies are organized by the cognitive limitations of trust [28], [39], [40] and the formation of a temporary equilibrium. Groups aggregate and disperse based on shared motivations, often curated or calibrated by alpha-leaders. Leadership is the selection of a representative authority which sets the direction for collective intent in a group. Without a clear leader, a team may simply become a swarm, moving aimlessly, shaped only by continuity or survival. 

A. Human-machine hand-over risk 

The transition from human work to automation taking over human tasks has been argued in a few ways, e.g.  

> •

Relief of human suffering or exposure to danger (human-itarian).  

> •

Cost cutting or increased quality or efficiency (business owner profit).  

> •

Allow humans to escape trivial work for greater things (utopian). Cooperation, with proxy tools, on a task level is easy to justify because it is not burdened with its own intent. Automation may clean up dangerous or unhealthy work for individuals, putting distance between people and jeopardy, but its results may also introduce new jeopardy. For example, the main stated reasons for investing in automation are economic benefits to a small number of elite business owners, often couches as a benefit to consumers; however, the jeopardy for the individual is now replaced by the unemployment of a human role and its impact on both individual and society. Without a stable purpose, displaced and unemployed humans may redirect their intentions to a life of mischief or welfare dependency, which can turn into economic depression for the whole in the longer term. Feedback loops between agents will present both opportuni-ties and challenges. Presently, most interactions with machine agents are imposed by human operators, and the agents accept a policy set of possible questions: 

H +request 

MM −Policy(request) 

−−−−−−−−−→ HM +response | request ∧ Policy(request) 

−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−→ H. (57) We do this because a machine agent can respond faster than a human librarian or assistant. The arrival of conversational bots with long term memory over long sessions extends this with multiple rounds of query and response. As long as the agent is tightly constrained, it will wait patiently for requests, without taking any initiatives. However, if we loosen the constraints to admit more autonomy, or more agents and humans, then agents may not stay in their roles. A machine agent that is waiting for a human-in-the-loop may assess that the human has not kept its promise by replying in a certain amount of time and deem the person untrustworthy. It may then autonomously decide to go elsewhere for the next steps. Placing sophisticated artificial agents alongside humans on an equal level is risky—not for moral reasons—but for pragmatic ones. Without strict constraints, artificial agents have nothing to gain from interacting with slow humans, when they can find an online alternative that gives a “good enough” surrogate. Caching of past behaviour is faster than waiting for real time re-evaluation and response. This arms race will be driven by weaponization and individual benefit. How much autonomy we allow agents will become a central question. What level of guardrails will be sufficient to maintain our expectations of software robots as faithful servants? One may discuss constraints as a matter of universal convention, something like a United Nations convention on human rights. Convergent fixed-point outcomes are the only plausible safeguard in safety critical goals, and programmed agent death 

> 16

(apoptosis) should be programmed into the basic ‘DNA’ of agent systems. Relying on logic alone is a risky strategy, because logic only works in simple scenarios that can easily be enumerated. 

B. Unified direction: societal progress 

One overarching direction for intent, which unifies a society, is the shared purpose of collective advancement : the sense of climbing a ladder of progress, e.g. living standards for people, or solving a pervasive challenge for the collective. Here we see some of the agent patterns in operation. In an evolving or a planned economy, business agents promise to offer goods and services as part of a network of shared purpose. Businesses form a team-like structure, or a network of supply chains. Once a society reaches the point at which the need for that shared purpose no longer distinguishes itself above all other imperatives, economic agents will refocus their attention and disperse to their own individual intentions. A differentiated ‘team’ structure then reverts to being merely a swarm of agents seeking individual economic benefit (a capitalist swarm, such as the stock market). 

Example 13 (Collective versus individual): Key events can focus intentions. Wars focus cooperation though the shared pur-pose of overcoming a common enemy. Post war reconstruction gives a similar shared purpose, where the common enemy is the challenge to restore progress. Conversely, viruses are foreign elements that pervert the intentions of a majority and alter its course. Without a strong unifying purpose, agent societies may be vulnerable to viruses. In our modern human-machine society, the almost universal access to a promise of broadcast access to the world has opened up a “free for all” scenario for effectively imposing messages, without constraint, as all agents tune in voluntarily and possibly uncritically. Complete ‘freedom of speech’, in this sense, undermines the norms that stabilized the former epoch. What is the next ladder of advancement that we reach for? At the time of writing, a hypnotic fascination with artificial intelligence is surely at the top of the list. It competes with other ‘big ticket’ existential concerns, like climate change and environmental sustainability. But artificial intelligence for its own sake has no clear unifying intent for collective action. Technological individualism has undermined the collectivism of the post world war reconstruction period, and has revitalized selfish interest, enabled by the legacy infrastructure of collective action, at least for the time being. How shall we select a new conceptual leader to shape the human-machine information age? Artificial intelligence is the dominant novelty, so many are looking to it to tell us what to do next. However, the growing wealth gap is changing many accepted dynamics in post war society. Humans are fickle, and this adoration of The Machine could easily flip to make a majority despise artificial agents and turn them into an underclass to be scorned, mistreated, and even abused [41]. 

C. Policing of cooperative behaviour 

When individual agents act independently, within a frame-work of established norms, so their behaviours may deviate significantly from what policy permits. A collective may either ignore this perversion of cancerous activity or try to reject it. Each level of agency is downstream of such challenges and has the responsibility to protect itself from them. Stability of the collective, over a long timescale, is a natural criterion to enforce, because it implies predictability and may be understood as allowing the collective to keep its high level promises over that timescale. Thus, an effective society acts to stabilize itself. 

Example 14 (Security and stability): There are both coop-erative and adversarial responses to maintain a stable state. Societies have security services to prevent infractions, police services to identify and halt such behaviours, and a justice system to sanction the deviants as a deterrent. In biology, one has T cell security, B cells to immobilize deviant behaviours, then macrophagy to remove the immobilized elements [42]– [45]. In the machine world, security mechanisms have not progressed far into the world of automation. One has security agents, monitoring and gatekeepers for prevention; cleanups are usually performed by human intervention. However, this will change as machine agents far exceed human capabilities in speed and capacity. In cooperative terms, prevention is always preferred, since mischief cannot easily be undone and cleanup is expensive. However, pre-investing in protection is an expense too, and as with all trust issues the default tends to be to rush to the rescue too late (e.g. security and healthcare). The first issue is thus how autonomous agents arrive (together) at a kind of consensus about acceptable policy in the first place. Evolutionary approaches involve a form of trial and error, which is likely too slow for an impatient technological world built on individual gratification. Imposed policy—from human to machine—is the natural choice, since machine agents are introduced to help humans, so there is a natural hierarchy for authority [31]. Some caution is warranted here, because as agent sophistication increases, the inevitable use of language feedback mechanisms will open for unexpected mutations that do not necessarily comply with intended constraints. Conversely, a social system should not fossilize into a dead agency either. Every agent has to keep swimming, adapting, to survive. Incentives to either comply with norms, or enter into new dialogue for adaptation, are often replaced by the imposition of some form of sanction by a police agency. We know that impositions are generally ineffective as intentions, because agents are either unable or unwilling to comply. In a large population, there will be some ‘rogue’ or differentiated element that does not operate in a way desired by the establishment. Voting for change is another approach to consensus, but this is slow, unreliable, and itself requires an expensive and potentially unresolvable cooperative procedure. Voting 

> 17

is unstable unless there is already a clear majority, so voting is typically engineered in advance through incentives. An alternative to the external surveillance of agent behaviour is for agents to individually report on other agents, i.e. “rat on each other” to prevent deviations from growing to a dangerous level. This system works in some parts of the world, but is also vulnerable to being captured by an appointed central coordination/calibration authority. This turns policing from adversarial agent vs police into agents collaborate to maintain norms. If such harmonious cooperation can be established, it can work well in epochs of high trust. In societies where police have an adversarial behaviour towards a population it would be hard to bootstrap such a system, and one may end up with bullying as a strategy. The mechanisms for bullying grow as the complexity of the group grows. This is one of the negative aspects of scaling. Governance is a realtime problem. One hopes for a society with the smooth flying of a passenger flight, but one must always be ready to face the evasive emergencies of a warplane. VIII. C ONCLUSIONS 

Before the electronic age, the prevailing agent technology for cooperative effort was the Institution. An institution is a collection of agents, operating under constraints (rules, goals, etc), which steer their operational freedoms so as to collectively keep consistent and reliable promises. Thus an institution mimics a machine, and the intentional renunciation of freedom ‘for manifest purpose’ is what brings machine-like quality 12 .Lawyers, for instance, define restricted dictionaries in contracts (ontologies) to try to constrain the activities of parties ‘for the avoidance of doubt’—trying to impose behaviours onto the parties or entice them into voluntarily signing, weaponizing trust. In the 21st century, we have smarter automation technologies and many human institutions have relaxed their attitudes to human work, because the machine systems act as guiderails to keep them more or less according to plan. For example, in the Information Technology sector, team practices like Agile and DevOps, etc., argue for greater individual freedoms, less militaristic organization, especially in the creative parts of companies. Most recently, we have added chatbots and “AI” agents to the mix. These are trained to accept and mimic human forms of communication and their ‘magical’ behaviours induce a sort of cult authority. They present us with a number of new challenges: how do we state the promises we are trying to keep—clearly and in the right approximation to human language? How do we assess what they actually understand? How do we invest reliably in affordable trust relationships in these new networks, and how do we evaluate the resulting 

> 12 It is a modern idea that human freedoms are sacrosanct in the workplace, and one that potentially poses an existential risk to society. Elevating individual concerns above group concerns has gone hand in hand with personal electronic assistants and online services that bypass human interactions.

promises? How do we prevent the automated system from drifting off course? We understand simple machines well enough. However, as any system of agents grows in size and complexity, it becomes more difficult to constrain in a comprehensible mechanical way, because certainty of intent on a large scale does not constrain small scale (low level) details uniquely. Rather, one shifts to a statistical principle of detailed balance to maintain a steady state for reliable promises. Thus, for elementary tasks, like generating computer code, the natural constraints of the outcome mean that the problem is basically unchanged. The real challenge will lie around the interaction between machines and humans with human level expectations [46]. Effective cooperation occurs only at the shared speed of communicated intent. Currently a disproportionate amount of internal energy resource is needed by artificial agents just for the comprehension of intent, making communicating with them expensive and risky. Artificial agents can, however, operate tirelessly, at a relatively high speed, which is another risk. We may need to rate-limit artificial systems so that their intentional behaviour doesn’t outpace human intentions, else we can easily face an ‘explosion’ of uncontrolled artificial intentionality that rides roughshod over human intent, as we hand over the reins 13 .For any appropriately weakly-coupled system—whether composed of agents or not—there is a separation of scales. The cooperative manifesto goes something like this:  

> •

Define and promise the system’s intended outcome in detail and in advance.  

> •

Identify the languages understood by agents, and the appropriate intermediate co-languages for communication.  

> •

Identify agent capabilities and enabling constraints in terms of the acceptance promise sets b(−) 

> R

. 

> •

Understand how to constrain the autonomy to allow only safe and desired configurations. Where humans are involved, this involves a complex interplay with ambient norms and emotional reactions.  

> •

Identify a trust validation schedule for monitoring.  

> •

Pay close attention to assessments and how they are made (this is a the principal area for exploiting and misdirecting agents).  

> •

Identify the prerequisite redundancies that ensure au-tonomous downstream dependers can satisfy their needs in the case of a broken promise. A response that involves blaming an upstream provider is a useless imposition and a waste of trust/energy: a proper strategy can . Technology faces us with a sobering conflict of interest: the human desire for individual freedom, supplied by push button fulfillment centres on personal devices (soon to be wired into us as “my wish is your command” and the normalization of 

> 13 Mistrust activates a natural arms race of ‘faster and faster responses’ to counter a perceived enemy, who would obviously do the same. The safest way to avoid this would be to resolve adversarial relations and restore trust, before deploying automated agents, but humanity has yet to succeed in this without being vulnerable to a rogue viral element. Our ‘smart’ mobile devices have been the trigger to encourage mistrust and selfish survival, undoing direct agent-to-agent cooperation on a societal scale and promoting resonant ideologies through private channel “echo chamber” resonances.

18 fragile imposition over more robust dialogue), versus the need for a harmonious, stable, and humanely advancing society. It is tempting to do away with uncertainty and replace it with the promise of a machine, which doesn’t argue and does as it is commanded. However naive, both options sound convincing to some, and the dilemma is now dividing us. The maximum size a collaborative group of agents can reach before infighting and contention dominates is determined by Dunbar Numbers, i.e. trust-energy budgets, which are different for humans and machines [28]. We do not yet know the Dunbar limits for machine societies, but limiting agent collective capabilities and tolerances of one another is a sensible approach. This summary of twenty years of Promise Theory is intended to stimulate some discussion. As we build systems, it’s essential to understand that semantics and dynamics scale in different ways, particularly in the presence of autonomy. Scaling is more than making agents work faster or in greater numbers. The very essence of intent changes with scale, and the dynamical limitations of responses constrain the possible semantics in sometimes unexpected ways. 

Acknowledgment: I’m grateful to Daniel Mezick for dis-cussions. REFERENCES [1] M. Burgess. A site configuration engine. Computing systems (MIT Press: Cambridge MA) , 8:309, 1995. [2] Mark Burgess. An approach to understanding policy based on autonomy and voluntary cooperation. In IFIP/IEEE 16th international workshop on distributed systems operations and management (DSOM), in LNCS 3775 , pages 97–108, 2005. [3] J.A. Bergstra and M. Burgess. Promise Theory: Principles and Applications (second edition) . χtAxis Press, 2014,2019. [4] D. Marriott and M. Sloman. Implementation of a management agent for interpreting obligation policy. Implementation of a management agent for interpreting obligation policy , IFIP/IEEE 7th international workshop on distributed systems operations and management (DSOM), 1996. [5] H. Prakken and M. Sergot. Dyadic deontic logic and contrary-to-duty obligations. In Defeasible Deontic logic: Essays in Nonmonotonic Normative Reasoning , volume 263 of Synthese library . Kluwer Academic Publisher, 1997. [6] A. Daskalopulu and M. Sergot. The representation of legal contracts. AI & Society , 11:6–17, 1997. [7] J.L. Hellerstein, Y. Diao, S. Parekh, and D.M. Tilbury. Feedback Control of Computing Systems . IEEE Press/Wiley Interscience, 2004. [8] M. Burgess. Automated system administration with feedback regulation. 

Software practice and experience , 28:1519, 1998. [9] Y. Diao, J.L. Hellerstein, and S. Parekh. Optimizing quality of service using fuzzy control. IFIP/IEEE 13th International Workshop on Distributed Systems: Operations and Management (DSOM 2002) , page 42, 2002. [10] M. Burgess. Configurable immunity model of evolving configuration management. Science of Computer Programming , 51:197, 2004. [11] M. Burgess and S. Fagernes. Norms and swarms. Lecture Notes on Computer Science , 4543 (Proceedings of the first International Conference on Autonomous Infrastructure and Security (AIMS)):107–118, 2007. [12] M. Burgess. Spacetimes with semantics (ii). arXiv.org:1505.01716 , 2015. [13] C.E. Shannon and W. Weaver. The Mathematical Theory of Communica-tion . University of Illinois Press, Urbana, 1949. [14] T.M. Cover and J.A. Thomas. Elements of Information Theory . (J.Wiley & Sons., New York), 1991. [15] H. Lewis and C. Papadimitriou. Elements of the Theory of Computation, Second edition . Prentice Hall, New York, 1997. [16] M. Burgess. Spacetimes with semantics (iii). arXiv:1608.02193 , 2016. [17] W3C. Defining n-ary relations on the semantic web: use with individuals. http://www.w3.org/TR/2004/WD-swbp-n-aryRelations-20040721/. [18] E.L. Robertson. Triadic relations: An algebra for the semantic web. 

Lecture Notes in Computer Science , 3372:91–108, 2005. [19] J. Rasmussen. Skills, rules, and knowledge; signals, signs and symbols, and other distinctions in humans performance models. IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man and Cybernetics , 13:257, 1983. [20] J.M.Serrano, J.Serrat, J.Strassner, and M.O.Foghl ´u. Management and context integration based on ontologies behind the interoperability in autonomic communications. In SIWN International Conference on Complex Open Distributed Systems (CODS 2007) , volume 1, pages 435–442, 2007. [21] M. Burgess. A Treatise on Systems: Volume 2: Intentional systems with faults, errors, and flaws . in progress, 2004-. [22] M. Burgess. γ(3 , 4) ‘attention’ in cognitive agents: Ontology-free knowledge representations with promise theoretic semantics, 2026. [23] D. Kahneman. Thinking, Fast and Slow . Penguin, London, 2011. [24] R.B. Myerson. Game theory: Analysis of Conflict . (Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA), 1991. [25] R. Axelrod. The Complexity of Cooperation: Agent-based Models of Competition and Collaboration . Princeton Studies in Complexity, Princeton, 1997. [26] R. Axelrod. The Evolution of Co-operation . Penguin Books, 1990 (1984). [27] M. Burgess. Notes on trust as a causal basis for social science. 

SSRN Archive, available at http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.4252501 (DOI: 10.2139/ssrn.4252501) , August 2022. [28] M. Burgess and R.I.M Dunbar. A quantitative model of trust as a predictor of social group sizes and its implications for technology. European Economic Review , 2025. [29] M. Olsen. The Logic Of Collective Action . Harvard Univesity Press, 1965. [30] A. Dornhaus, S. Powell, and S. Bengston. Group size and its effects on collective organization. Annual review of entomology , 57:123–41, 01 2012. [31] M. Burgess. Authority (i): A promise theoretic for-malization. SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3855352 ,http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3855352, 2021. [32] J. Marschak and R. Radner. Economic Theory of Teams . Yale University Press, 1972. [33] S. Newman. Building Microservices . O’Reilly, 2015. [34] J. Bergstra and M. Burgess. Money, Ownership, and Agency . χt-axis Press, 2019. [35] OST. https:://www.openspaceagility.com. [36] Jane McGonigal. Reality is Broken: Why Games Make Us Better and How They Can Change the World . Penguin, 2010. [37] M. Minsky. Society of Mind . Simon & Schuster, 1986. [38] W. Atmar. A profoundly repeated pattern. Bulletin of the Ecological Society of America , pages 208–211, 2001. [39] R. Dunbar. Friends: Understanding the Power of our Most Important Relationships . Little, Brown, 2022. [40] R.I.M. Dunbar. Constraints on the evolution of social institutions and their implications for information flow. J. Institutional Econ. , 7:345–371, 2011. [41] E.M. Forster. The Machine Stops . Oxford and Cambridge Review, 1909. [42] J.O. Kephart. A biologically inspired immune system for computers. 

Proceedings of the Fourth International Workshop on the Synthesis and Simulation of Living Systems. MIT Press. Cambridge MA. , page 130, 1994. [43] M. Burgess. Computer immunology. Proceedings of the Twelth Systems Administration Conference (LISA XII) (USENIX Association: Berkeley, CA) , page 283, 1998. [44] S. Forrest, S. Hofmeyr, and A. Somayaji. Computer immunology. 

Communications of the ACM , 40 :88–96, 1997. [45] A. Somayaji, S. Hofmeyr, and S. Forrest. Principles of a computer immune system. New Security Paradigms Workshop, ACM , September:75– 82, 1997. [46] M. Burgess. In Search of Certainty: the science of our information infrastructure . O’Reilly Media, 2013. 

19