Title: Similarity of Information in Games

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.28190v1

Published Time: Tue, 31 Mar 2026 01:50:23 GMT

Number of Pages: 50

Markdown Content:
# Similarity of Information in Games ∗

## Deepal Basak 

Indiana University 

## Joyee Deb 

New York University 

## Aditya Kuvalekar 

University of Essex 

## March 31, 2026 

Abstract 

Algorithmic content targeting homogenizes information, with implica-tions for strategic interactions. For example, this increased homogeniza-tion was arguably responsible for the run on the Silicon Valley Bank. We argue that existing measures of similarity are inappropriate for studying games—especially coordination games—because they do not discipline agents’ conditional beliefs. We propose a class of stochastic orders, Concentration Along the Diagonal (CAD), built on agents’ conditional beliefs. In canonical binary-action coordination games, greater CAD-similarity is both necessary and sufficient for strategic similarity—agents adopt the same strategy. We further demonstrate CAD’s applicability in congestion games, collective ac-tion, and second-price auctions. 

Keywords: coordination games, information similarity. 

JEL Codes: D82, D83 

# 1. Introduction 

In recent times, algorithmic targeting of content has resulted in increased ho-mogenization of information among like-minded individuals: People with similar 

> ∗

This research was supported in part by National Science Foundation award 2417694. Ku-valekar thanks the Indian School of Business for their hospitality. We are grateful to Nageeb Ali, Dirk Bergemann, Geoffroy De Clippel, Duarte Goncalves, Nima Haghpanah, Johannes H¨ orner, Elliot Lipnowski, Michael Mandler, Meg Meyer, Dilip Mookherjee, Stephen Morris, Alessandro Pavan, Ludvig Sinander, Bruno Strulovici, and conference audiences and seminar participants at Bonn University, Brown University, Carnegie Mellon University, Cornell University, Indian Statistical Institute Delhi, National University of Singapore, Ohio State University, Oxford Uni-versity, Paris School of Economics, Royal Holloway University, Toulouse School of Economics, University of Rochester, University of Surrey, Duke & UNC, and Penn State for their help-ful comments and suggestions. Basak: Indiana University, Kelley School of Business, email: dbasak@iu.edu; Deb: New York University, email: joyee.deb@nyu.edu, Kuvalekar: University of Essex, email: a.kuvalekar@essex.ac.uk. 

1

> arXiv:2603.28190v1 [econ.GN] 30 Mar 2026

demographic traits or preferences are exposed to the same content. 1 This ho-mogenization can affect agent behavior in strategic situations. For instance, both empirical research and news media have highlighted how access to the same infor-mation on Twitter encouraged many people to withdraw deposits, precipitating a run on Silicon Valley Bank in 2023. 2 The narrative is that people accessed the same information about the health of the bank and reacted to this information in the same way, causing a run which may not have been possible without the homogenization of information. Motivated by this discourse, we seek to systemat-ically investigate how increased information similarity across agents affects their strategic interactions. We present a simple bank-run example that motivates the central question of our paper. This example demonstrates that increasing information similarity across agents in some natural ways—like increasing correlation—does not increase the expected number of people that would run on the bank! Motivated by this observation, we ask: What type of information homogenization encourages agents to follow the same strategy as others in the face of incomplete information in coordination games such as bank runs? Our main contribution is to answer this question by proposing a new class of stochastic orders—Concentration Along the Diagonal (CAD)—to compare similarity of information. 

Correlation and Coordination: A puzzle 

Two agents each decide whether to stay (S) or run (R) on a bank. The payoff from running is 0. The payoff from staying is θ if the other player stays, and θ ´ 1if the other runs, where θ is an underlying state, say the health of the bank, which is unknown: θ P ␣32 , 12 , ´12

(.Stay Run Stay θ, θ θ ´ 1, 0Run 0, θ ´ 1 0, 0Notice that staying is dominant if θ “ 32 and running is dominant if θ “ ´ 12 . The state θ is drawn from the prior P pθ “ 32 q “ P pθ “ ´ 12 q “ ϵ and P pθ “ 12 q “ 1 ´ 2ϵ.Each agent i sees a private signal si about the realized θ. The signals ps1, s 2q in state θ are drawn from some joint distribution Gθ over ␣´12 , 12 , 32

( ˆ ␣´12 , 12 , 32

(.Assume that signals are sufficiently accurate so that R is strictly dominated for an agent with signal si “ 32 and S is strictly dominated for an agent with signal 

si “ ´ 12 .3

Consider the largest run on the bank possible in any symmetric pure strategy                     

> 1A large literature documents the decrease in diversity of content consumption across users as a result of recommendation algorithms. See, for example, Anwar et al. (2024); Aridor et al. (2020); Chaney et al. (2018); Nechushtai et al. (2024); Nguyen et al. (2014) for evidence of homogenization in various contexts from online purchases to news consumption.
> 2See 1, 2, 3, or Cookson et al. (2023); Gam et al. (2023) on bank runs.
> 3A sufficient condition is Ppsi“θ|θq “ pand Ppsi“θ1|θq “ 1´p
> 2for θ1‰θwith pą3´3ϵ
> 3´ϵ.

2equilibrium. This would involve each agent i staying if and only if she gets a signal si “ 32 . Essentially, the existence of such an equilibrium depends only on whether a player with a signal 12 wishes to run or not. This, in turn, solely depends on how likely it is, according to this player, that the other player receives a signal  

> 12

or ´12 .Suppose we started with an information structure where such an equilibrium exists and make players’ signals more correlated. Intuitively, we should expect more correlated information to cause more people to run on the bank, because, conditional on their own private signal, each agent now thinks that it is more likely that others have also seen a similar signal and will run on the bank. For instance, at the extreme, if all the agents see exactly the same information, then for any observed signal, if all others are willing to run on the bank, and running undominated, then any individual will also run on the bank. Surprisingly, it is not true that more correlated information makes larger bank runs possible. The figure below shows two joint distributions Gθ“ 12 and Fθ“ 12 of signals in state θ “ 12 , where Fθ“ 12 has a higher correlation. 4 For example, the ´α and `α

in the top row mean that the probability mass on p´ 12 , 32 q under Fθ“ 12 is α less than under Gθ“ 12 , and the probability mass on p12 , 32 q under Fθ“ 12 is α more than under Gθ“ 12 . It is easy to verify that F not only has higher correlation than G, but also is greater than G in the supermodular order, positive quadrant dependence order or concordance orders, for any positive and feasible α. Notice that when the 

´ 12

> 12
> 32

´ 12

> 12
> 32

X1

X2

Distribution Gθ“ 12

´ 12

> 12
> 32

´ 12

> 12
> 32

X1

X2

´α

´2α `α

`α

`α

`α

´α

Distribution Fθ“ 12

Figure 1: Increasing interdependence according to existing orders ( α ą 0). 

signals become more correlated in this way, the probability that a player with a signal 12 assigns to the other player receiving a signal ´12 or 12 —and therefore the other player running—decreases. Thus, we may no longer be able to support an equilibrium where players run on ´12 and 12 . In a nutshell, in this simple example, increasing correlation of information decreases the maximal (across all equilibria) expected number of people that would run on the bank! Why do we get this intuitively implausible result? The reason is that in a game of incomplete information, players’ incentive constraints—and hence their choice       

> 4For simplicity, assume that the signals are conditionally independent when θP t´ 12,32u.

3of actions—are affected by their conditional beliefs , and an increase in correlation (or other commonly used stochastic orders such as supermodular order or positive quadrant dependence) 5 only increases the joint probability of agents receiving similar information, but does not necessarily affect agents’ conditional beliefs in the natural way that drives more agents to run. Indeed, this example does not invalidate our intuition that increased infor-mation homogenization should encourage agents to follow the same strategy as others in coordination games. Rather, it highlights that correlation may not be the right notion to talk about homogenization of information, and we need to think about what type of homogenization of information causes agents to follow the same strategy as others. Formally, we want a notion of similarity to compare joint distributions of signals which satisfies the following intuitive property. In any canonical binary-action coordination game of incomplete information, 

if an agent is willing to play the same strategy as all the other agents, then she should still be willing to play that strategy, if the private infor-mation across agents became more similar under this specified notion. 

In other words, the set of symmetric pure strategy Bayes-Nash equilibria should expand with greater information similarity. The first contribution of this paper is to introduce a new class of orders— Concentration Along the Diagonal (CAD) orders—that rank the similarity of joint distributions by comparing conditional beliefs , which is what affects behavior in strategic situations. Roughly speaking, an increase in a CAD order means that, conditional on receiving information, each agent believes that it is now more likely that others have also received the same information. The CAD orders indeed satisfy the above notion of increasing information similarity in strategic settings. In the main results of the paper, we establish that CAD orders not only satisfy this intuitive property, but also characterize it: We prove that increasing information similarity in a CAD order (weakly) is equivalent to expanding the set of symmetric equilibria in a canonical class of binary-action coordination games of incomplete information. We then use the CAD orders for other games, such as congestion, collective action, and auctions. Formally, we define an information structure to be the joint distribution of private signals (types) that agents observe. We consider finite and ordered signals. We introduce two different orders to compare these joint distributions. Our first notion is called Concentration Along the Diagonal (CAD) . We say an information structure F is more similar than G, or greater in the CAD order, if any agent i

believes, conditional on her realized signal s, that it is more likely under F than 

G, that any other agent j also has observed exactly the same signal s.6 Notice that an increase in similarity, as measured by the CAD order, requires that any 

> 5There is a large literature in statistics and economics on stochastic orders. See Meyer and Strulovici (2012, 2015); Meyer (1990); M¨ uller and Scarsini (2000); M¨ uller and Stoyan (2002)
> 6It turns out that CAD is equivalent to an order proposed by Meyer (1990).

4two agents see exactly the same signal with a higher probability. This may be too strong in some contexts, making the orders quite incomplete. Indeed, two information structures F and G are not comparable even if the probability of the signals being very close in value was higher under F, and the probability of signals being very different in value was lower under F. This motivates our definition of a second order, the contour-set CAD order, which uses the order structure of the signal set. Roughly speaking, increased similarity in the contour-set CAD order means that the signals are close to each other in value with a higher probability. Motivated by our premise—that more similar information should expand the set of symmetric pure strategy Bayes-Nash equilibria in canonical binary action coordination games—we consider a canonical class of binary-action coordination games with multiple players, in which a player’s payoff depends on the aggregate actions of other players and on a payoff-relevant state. Before taking their ac-tion, players receive a signal about the state drawn according to the information structure. The payoff difference between taking the two actions is of the form 

dpA´i, ω iq “ αpωiq ` βpωiqhpA´iq,

where A´i denotes the aggregate actions of other players, ωi is player i’s signal, 

βp¨q ě 0 and h is an increasing affine function. Here, ωi can be a private payoff-relevant signal making this setting a private-value coordination game. We also allow common-value coordination games, in which the payoff difference depends on a common payoff-relevant state ωi “ ω across agents, with agents receiving private signals about ω. Many important economic applications share this structure. For the private value case, one can think about N firms choosing whether or not to invest in a new technology. Each firm’s payoff from investing increases with the aggregate investment and her type that captures the value of the technology to her. An example of a common-value setting is a bank run game. 7

Our first main result, Theorem 1, shows that increasing similarity of the infor-mation structure in the CAD order is in fact equivalent to expanding the set of symmetric equilibria in this class of private-value coordination games. To under-stand the argument, consider the set of signals K for which agents take a certain action in equilibrium. Consider an agent who receives a signal s P K. If informa-tion becomes more CAD-similar, then this agent believes that another player is more likely to see a signal in the set K that contains her own signal. This makes her more optimistic about the expected number of other players who will play the same action. Therefore, she has a higher incentive to play the same strategy as others, thus expanding the set of symmetric pure strategy BNE. Conversely, if information structure changes in a way that is not more CAD-similar, then there exists a set K and s P K such that an agent who receives a signal s believes that another agent is less likely to see a signal in set K that contains her signal. We can then construct a coordination game in which there is an equilibrium where agents 

> 7See Morris et al. (2016) for examples of both private and common value cases.

5play a certain action when they see a signal in set K. However, when information structure changes, in this game, an agent with signal s no longer wants to play the same action, thus eliminating this equilibrium. We also establish that CAD-similarity is equivalent to increasing (decreasing) the maximal (minimal) number of agents playing a certain action across all equilibria. Our second result Theorem 2 establishes that increasing similarity of the infor-mation structure in the contour-CAD order expands the set of symmetric mono-tone equilibria in the class of common-value coordination games. The converse is also true under an additional regularity condition. We also establish that under this regularity condition, in common-value coordination games, the maximal par-ticipation across all equilibria increases and the minimal participation decreases if and only if information becomes more contour-CAD similar. These two main results speak about how information similarity makes it possi-ble for agents to play the same strategy in equilibrium. One may be interested in whether more CAD similarity improves welfare. In general, coordination games have multiple equilibria, and so the effect on welfare depends on which equilib-rium is selected. For instance, in the bank run example, suppose that the social planner wants to minimize the probability of a run. If the planner anticipates the agents will play the adversarial (maximal run) equilibrium, then she prefers lesser homogenization of information. Conversely, if the planner anticipates the agents will play the advantageous (minimal run) equilibrium, then she prefers greater homogenization of information. The two characterization results, albeit for a specific class of games, serve as a powerful proof-of-concept for the CAD orders. An interesting line of inquiry is to study the effect of increasing similarity of information in the CAD order in other strategic settings beyond affine coordination games. We consider coordination set-tings in which an agent’s incentive to take an action increases with the aggregate action but not necessarily in an affine fashion, i.e., hp¨q is an increasing function but not affine. We develop a stronger notion of CAD, called sCAD, and establish a similar equivalence result. We then consider games of strategic substitutability like congestion games, and show that, analogous to our main results, more CAD-similar information shrinks the set of symmetric equilibria in congestion games. In an auction setting, we show that the revenue from a second-price auction in-creases when players’ valuations become more similar in the CAD order. In Basak et al. (Forthcoming), we consider collective action games—games with both strate-gic complementarities and substitutabilities—and show that CAD yields a neat characterization of when increased similarity of information facilitates or hinders collective action. 

## 1.1. Related Literature 

Our paper relates to a literature in economics and statistics on comparing interde-pendence of random variables, (see Meyer and Strulovici, 2012, 2015; Meyer, 1990; 6M¨ uller and Stoyan, 2002, for instance). Meyer and Strulovici (2012) and Meyer and Strulovici (2015) illustrate the usefulness of various existing dependence or-ders, particularly the supermodular order, for economic applications. Epstein and Tanny (1980) provide a behavioral foundation based on preferences for correlation for the supermodular order in the case of bivariate random variables. 8 However, most of the existing orders do not compare the conditional belief distributions that arise in strategic settings with incomplete information. 9

We contribute more broadly to research on games of incomplete information. A large literature that dates back at least to Hirshleifer (1971) studies how exogenous changes in the information environment impacts behavior in games. More recently, Morris and Shin (2002), Angeletos and Pavan (2007), Bergemann and Morris (2013), Jensen (2018), and Mekonnen and Vizca´ ıno (2022) have studied this in a class of games similar to ours where information is dispersed among agents. These studies focus on the value of new information, whereas our setup has no new information. Instead, the information becomes more or less similar. When there is a common state, as is typical in the above-mentioned papers, similarity of information affects the agents’ strategic uncertainty but not their fundamental uncertainty (see Remark 1). Unlike in the global games literature, our focus is not on equilibrium uniqueness, but rather we show how the set of equilibrium changes with similarity of information. Gossner (2000), Cherry and Smith (2012), and Bergemann and Morris (2016) have also proposed ranking of information structures based on equilibrium set inclusion. We consider the effect of changing interdependence of multivariate random vari-ables while keeping fixed the marginal distributions. Clemen and Winkler (1985) and Cheng and Borgers (2024) study how such changes impact the value of infor-mation and show that informational diversity may be valuable. de Oliveira et al. (2023) consider an environment with known marginal distributions but unknown joint distribution to obtain the robustly optimal policy in a class of decision prob-lems. Cripps et al. (2008) and Awaya and Krishna (2025) study the effect of the interdependence of signals on common learning. Awaya and Krishna (2025) show that when agents receive information over multiple periods, then more interde-pendence of information within period obstructs common learning. This happens because increasing interdependence within a period does not imply that the signals across multiple periods become more similar. 10 

> 8Strictly speaking, they focus on the lower orthant order, which is equivalent to the super-modular order in two dimensions.
> 9It is worth mentioning that the CAD orders satisfy all the desirable properties of stochastic orders of interdependence proposed by Joe (1997).
> 10 See Online Appendix Section B.3 for a more detailed discussion.

72. Notions of Information Similarity 

Since we are interested in studying similarity in settings with incomplete informa-tion and multiple agents we define an information structure to be a joint distri-bution of agents’ private signals or types. 11 We define two orders of similarity of information structures. The notions stem from the basic idea that more similar information means that conditional on observing a private signal s, a player be-lieves any other player is more likely to have observed exactly the same signal s.This motivates the name for our class of orders “Concentration along a Diagonal.” Let S be a fixed, finite set of types. Let ⃗ X “ p X1, X2, . . . , XN q denote the 

SN ´valued random variable that represents the types of N agents. We assume that ⃗ X is distributed according to some exchangeable distribution F. For any i

and j ‰ i, and any K Ă S, we define Fsp¨q P ∆pSq by 

FspKq :“ P rob pXj P K|Xi “ sq.

In particular, Fsps1q means Fspt Xj “ s1|Xi “ suq . Exchangeability of F implies that we need not index these conditional distributions with player identities. 

## 2.1. Concentration along a Diagonal 

Definition 1 (Concentration along a Diagonal ): We say that F has a “higher concentration along a diagonal” than G, or F is CAD higher than 

G, denoted by F ěCAD G, if, 1. F and G have the same marginal distributions. And, 2. For all s P S, and any i, j 

(a) Fspsq ě Gspsq, and (b) Fsps1q ď Gsps1q whenever s1 ‰ s.

If X „ F and Y „ G with F ěCAD G, we say X ěCAD Y, i.e., we use X ěCAD Y

and F ěCAD G interchangeably. In words, when information becomes more similar in the CAD order, any agent i

believes, conditional on being realized type s, that it is more likely that any other agent j is also of exactly the same type s. It is worth noting that verifying whether two distributions are ranked in this order is not computationally hard. For exchangeable distributions, the complexity is Op| S|2q. The CAD order is equivalent to the orders in Meyer (1990) (see Proposition 1 and 5 from Meyer, 1990). To gain some more intuition about the CAD order, we provide some equivalent formulations in the lemma below. It is almost immediate that an increase in the CAD order is equivalent to requiring that, conditional on being of type s, any 

> 11 Henceforth, we will use the terms “types” and “signals” interchangeably.

8agent i assigns higher probability to another agent j having type in any subset of types that includes type s. Another way to formulate the order is in terms of the number of other agents who have the same type as a given agent i. An increase in similarity in the CAD order means that, conditional on any agent i being of type s, the expected number of other agents with type in any subset of types that includes s is higher. We state this below. The proof is in the appendix. Define, for any agent i, for any K Ď S,

IpKq :“ ÿ

> j‰i

1Xj PK

IpKq counts the number of players other than player i with realized type in set 

K. IpKq is a t0, 1, . . . , N ´ 1u-valued random variable. Let Hs,K  

> F

denote the CDF of IpKq conditional on Xi “ s, and X is distributed according to F.

Lemma 1: Let X and Y be two SN -valued, exchangeable random variables with distributions F and G respectively. Moreover, F and G have identical marginals. Then, the following are equivalent. 1. F ěCAD G.2. P rob pXj P K|Xi “ sq ě P rob pYj P K|Yi “ sq @i, j, s, K Q s. 

3. For all s P S and K Ď S such that s P K, and for all i,

E

„

IpKq

ˇˇˇˇXi “ s

ȷ

ě E

„

IpKq

ˇˇˇˇYi “ s

ȷ

.

An increase in similarity, as measured by CAD, requires that any two agents see exactly the same signal with a higher probability. This may be too strong in some contexts, making the orders quite incomplete. Suppose that the signals are ordered. Indeed, two information structures F and G are not comparable even if the probability of events in which F and G are very close in value is higher under 

F, and the probability of events in which F and G are very different in value is lower under F.

## 2.2. Concentration along a Diagonal: Contour Sets 

We introduce a weaker (less incomplete) order of similarity called Contour-set CAD that uses the ordering of signals. Intuitively, increased similarity according to the contour-set CAD order, no longer means that there is a higher chance of getting exactly the same signal. Rather, F is more similar than G if the signals are close to each other in value with a higher probability under F than under G.Formally, assume that the set of signals S is an ordered set with s1 ď s2 ď

. . . ď sn. Given any ps P S, we define upper and lower contour sets of ps.

psÒ :“ t y P S : y ě psu.

9psÓ :“ t y P S : y ď psu.

Recall that the notation Fsps1q means Fspt Xj “ s1|Xi “ suq .

Definition 2 (Concentration along a Diagonal: Contour Sets ): We say that F has a “higher concentration on the contour sets along a diagonal” than G,or F is cCAD higher than G, denoted by F ěcCAD G, if, 1. F and G have the same marginal distributions. And, 2. For all s P S,(a) FsppsÒq ě GppsÒq for all ps ď s, and (b) FsppsÓq ě GppsÓq for all ps ě s

The contour set CAD order can be stated in terms of intervals. It turns out that F has a higher concentration on the contour sets along a diagonal than G, if and only if conditional on being of type s, an agent i assigns higher probability to any other agent j having type in any interval of types that includes type s.

Definition 3 (Concentration along a Diagonal: Intervals ): We say that 

F has a “higher concentration on the intervals along a diagonal” than G, or F is iCAD higher than G, denoted by F ěiCAD G, if, 1. F and G have the same marginal distributions. And, 2. For all s P S, FspKq ě GspKq for all the intervals K Q s.

We state the equivalence of ěcCAD and ěiCAD formally in Proposition 1. 

## 2.3. Comparing the notions 

The next result characterizes the relationship between these orders. The relation-ship is as a reader might expect. 

Proposition 1: Let X, Y be two SN valued random variables, where S is an ordered set. 

X ěCAD Y ùñ X ěcCAD Y ðñ X ěiCAD Y.

Proof of Proposition 1. The result that X ěCAD Y ùñ X ěcCAD Y follows by invoking Lemma 1 and letting K be any upper- or lower-contour sets. Since contour sets are intervals X ěiCAD Y ùñ X ěcCAD Y is also trivially true. Next, we prove X ěcCAD Y ùñ X ěiCAD Y. Suppose that X „ F and 

Y „ G with F ěcCAD G, but F ğiCAD G. Therefore, D s P S and an interval 

K Q s such that FspKq ă GspKq. Let s, ¯s be the min and max elements of K

respectively. We have, 1 “Fspt s1 : s1 ă suq ` FspKq ` Fspt s1 : s1 ą ¯suq “Gspt s1 : s1 ă suq ` GspKq ` Gspt s1 : s1 ą ¯suq 

Therefore, at least one of the following holds: 10 piq Fspt s1 : s1 ă suq ą Gspt s1 : s1 ă suq .

pii q Fspt s1 : s1 ą ¯suq ą Gspt s1 : s1 ą ¯suq 

If piq holds, then FspsÒq ă GspsÒq. If pii q holds, then Fsp¯sÓq ă Gsp¯sÓq. In either case, this contradicts F ěcCAD G.To see that ěcCAD does not imply ěCAD , consider Figure 2. We start with a random variable X with a support t1, 2, 3, 4u ˆ t 1, 2, 3, 4u. We construct a random variable Y by increasing the mass on realizations p1, 1q, p2, 3q, p3, 2q, and p4, 4q by 

α ą 0 each, and reducing the mass on realizations p1, 3q, p2, 4q, p3, 1q, and p4, 2q by 

α. The marginal distributions of X and Y coincide. Moreover, X ěcCAD Y but 

X ńCAD Y.

X1

X2

1 2 3 4

1

2

3

4

´α

´α

´α

´α

`α

`α

`α

`α

Figure 2: Y ěcCAD X but Y ńCAD X.In the appendix B.2, we discuss the relationship between the CAD orders and other well-known orders such as supermodular order or concordance order. For 

N “ 2, our orders imply the supermodular and positive quadrant dependence order, and for N ą 2 the notions are not nested. 

# 3. CAD Similarity and Coordination Equivalence 

The example in the introduction highlighted, somewhat surprisingly, that an in-crease in correlation (or in the supermodular order or positive quadrant depen-dence) does not increase the incentives for an agent to play the same strategy as others in simple coordination games. In this section, we show that in a canon-ical class of binary-action coordination games, increasing information similarity across agents in the sense of increasing CAD is equivalent to expanding the set of equilibria. 12 

> 12 Bergemann and Morris (2016) also use equilibrium set inclusion to define a partial order of informativeness in games of incomplete information. The authors propose that more information shrinks the set of Bayes Correlated Equilibria because if agents have more information, then a smaller set of outcomes is incentive-compatible.

11 The canonical class of binary-action coordination games we consider has been widely used in macroeconomics (e.g., Morris and Shin, 1998, for a currency attack), financial economics (e.g., Goldstein and Pauzner, 2005; Vives, 2014, for bank-runs and financial fragility), industrial organization (e.g., Farrell and Klemperer, 2007, for a platform network externality), political economy (e.g., Shadmehr and Bernhardt, 2011, for protests), development economics (e.g., Sakovics and Steiner, 2012, for under-investment problem), international economy (e.g., Konrad and Stolper, 2016, for tax havens), and organizational economics (e.g., Cheng and Hsiaw, 2022, for reporting sexual misconduct problem). We consider two kinds of coordination games: private value and common value. The main difference is that the first kind does not have a common state whereas the second kind does. Morris et al. (2016) first highlighted this distinction. 

## 3.1. Binary-action private-value coordination games 

Consider a setting in which N players, indexed by i or j ‰ i, simultaneously and independently choose whether to take an action ( ai “ 1) or not ( ai “ 0). Each player i’s payoff depends on the aggregate action by others 

A´i “ ÿ

> j‰i

aj .

Using the same notation as in Section 2, we let S be a fixed, finite set from which player types are drawn. Let ⃗ X “ p X1, X2, . . . , XN q be a SN ´valued random variable distributed according to an exchangeable distribution F. Suppose that ⃗s “ p s 1, s 2, . . . s N q P SN is the realized type profile. Player i knows her own type 

si but does not know a different player j’s type sj . As before, for any two agents i

and j ‰ i, and any K Ă S define Fsp¨q P ∆pSq by 

FspKq :“ P rob pXj P K|Xi “ sq.

In particular, Fsps1q means Fspt Xj “ s1uq .A player i with type Xi “ si gets a payoff of upai “ 1, A´i, s iq if she acts and 

upai “ 0, A´i, s iq if she does not act. The net payoff from taking action a “ 1 is 

dpA´i, s iq :“ upai “ 1, A´i, s iq ´ upai “ 0, A´i, s iq “ αpsiq ` βpsiqhpA´iq (1) where hp¨q is increasing and βp¨q is non-negative. Since βp¨q ě 0 for all s P

S, the game Γ exhibits strategic complementarity. Henceforth, we refer to such symmetric binary-action games of strategic complementarity simply as private-value coordination games .

Definition 4 (Affine Private-value Coordination games ): A game Γ acalled an affine private-value coordination game when the payoff difference can be described by Equation (1) and hp.q is affine. 

12 Assumption 1: Payoff-relevant signals: For every i P N and si, s 1 

> i

P S such that si ‰ s1

> i

, there is A´i such that dpA´i, s iq ‰ dpA´i, s 1

> i

q.

This assumption simply precludes the possibility of artificially creating finer signal spaces from the original signal space to render the notion of changing sim-ilarity vacuous. 13 

Technology adoption by firms is an example of such a game. To fix ideas, con-sider N firms choosing whether or not to invest in a new technology. A firm’s type si captures the value of the new technology to her. Each firm’s payoff from investment depends also on the aggregate investment. The non-negative βp¨q cap-tures the network externality (see Farrell and Saloner, 1986; Katz and Shapiro, 1985), where each firm benefits when more firms invest in the new technology. 

Equilibrium 

We restrict attention to symmetric Bayes Nash Equilibrium in pure strategies (henceforth, equilibrium). Under distribution F, a strategy profile where each player plays σ : S Ñ t 0, 1u constitutes an equilibrium if 

σpsq “ 1 ùñ ErdpA´i, s q| s, σ ; Fs ě 0 (IC:P) 

σpsq “ 0 ùñ ErdpA´i, s q| s, σ ; Fs ď 0 (IC:NP) Let EpΓ, Fq be the set of equilibrium in the game Γ under distribution F. The restriction to symmetric pure strategies implies that any strategy σ simply parti-tions the signal space into participation and non-participation sets—sets of signals after which agents take action and do not take action respectively. 

P pσq :“ t s P S : σpsq “ 1u, N P pσq :“ SzP pσq.

Define the maximal and minimal participation across all equilibria as follows 

VpΓ, Fq :“ max 

> σPEpΓ,Fq

FpP pσqq and UpΓ, Fq :“ min 

> σPEpΓ,Fq

FpP pσqq .

## 3.2. CAD Similarity and Coordination Equivalence 

Our first result, Theorem 1 shows that increasing similarity of information in the CAD order is equivalent to aiding agents playing the same strategy in the class of coordination games Γ when hp¨q is affine. 

Theorem 1: Let F and G be two joint distributions over SN . The following are equivalent. 1. F ěCAD G.

> 13 For instance, in bank run example, a new signal space can be created by “splitting” each signal into two signals by adding a payoff irrelevant feature, such as color. Then, a CAD increase in the original signal space may not translate to a CAD increase in the new signal space.

13 2. EpΓ, Fq Ě EpΓ, Gq for all affine private-value coordination games Γ.3. VpΓ, Fq ě VpΓ, Gq for all affine private-value coordination games Γ.4. UpΓ, Fq ď UpΓ, Gq for all affine private-value coordination games Γ.

The formal proof is in the appendix. Below, we discuss the main argument. We first show that an equilibrium σ remains an equilibrium when information become more CAD-similar (from G to F). Given equilibrium σ, let P pσq and N P pσq

be the set of signals under which an agent participate and do not participate, respectively. Consider any agent i with signal s. When information becomes more CAD similar, her incentive to participate changes as follows 

ErdpA´i, s q| s, σ ; Fs ´ ErdpA´i, s q| s, σ ; Gs“ βpsq r ErhpA´iq| s, σ ; Fs ´ ErhpA´iq| s, σ ; Gss .

Recall that βpsq ě 0, hp¨q is affine and increasing, and A´i is the number of agents who receives signals in P pσq. By Lemma 1, an agent with s P P pσq expects more agents to see a signal in P pσq that contains her own signal. Therefore, she has a higher incentive to participate than before (the above expression is non-negative). Conversely, an agent with s P N P pσq expects fewer agents to see a signal in P pσq

that does not contain her own signal. Therefore, she has a lower incentive to participate than before (the above expression is non-positive). Therefore, if σ is an equilibrium under G then it remains an equilibrium under more CAD similar 

F. This establishes p1q ùñ p2q. If the set of equilibrium expands, then the maximal participation increases and the minimal participation decreases, which establishes p2q ùñ p 3q, p4q.Finally, we establish that p3q ùñ p1q. A similar argument holds for p4q ùñ p1q. Suppose that (3) holds, but F ńCAD G. Then, Ds˚ P S and K Q s˚ such that, 

FpXj P K|Xi “ s˚q ă GpXj P K|Xi “ s˚q.

Consider a strategy profile σ with participation set P pσq “ K. We can construct a game Γ in which σ is the maximal equilibrium under information structure G.To do this, we choose αpsq sufficiently negative for s R K, so that participation is a dominated strategy for s R K. Also, by construction, we make an agent with signal 

s˚ indifferent between participating and not participating under G. Now, consider changing the information structure to F. It follows from the above inequality that the agent with signal s˚ now strictly prefers not participating. This means 

σ is no longer an equilibrium under F. Recall that it is a dominated strategy for s R K to participate. Therefore, under F, there is no other equilibrium with greater participation. Since given σ, aggregate participation depends only on the marginal distribution, we must have VpΓ, Fq ă VpΓ, Gq, which contradicts (3). 14 3.3. Common-value Affine Coordination Games 

Theorems 1 establishes an equivalence between increases in similarity in CAD or-ders and the expansion of the set of all pure strategy equilibria. But in many economic applications, it is reasonable to consider some structure in the equilib-rium strategies: For instance, in this section, we study a class of coordination games commonly studied in the global games literature, in which it is typical to focus on equilibria in cutoff strategies— a player acts if and only if her type is high enough. 14 We establish an analogous equivalence between increasing similarity in the contour-CAD order and expanding the set of cutoff equilibria. As in Section 3.1, we consider a setting in which N players simultaneously and independently choose whether to act pai “ 1q or not pai “ 0q. But now, each player i’s payoff depends on the aggregate action by others and an unknown but common underlying state θ P Θ, where Θ is a finite ordered set. The state is drawn from a common prior μ0 P ∆pΘq. We interpret an agent’s type as the private signal she receives about the underlying state. Let S be a fixed, finite ordered set of signals, and the profile of signals ⃗ X be a SN ´valued random variable. Conditional on θ “ θ,⃗ X is distributed according to Fθ. We assume that Fθ is exchangeable for all θ P Θ. Therefore, F is also exchangeable. A player i receives a signal Xi. The marginal distribution of Xi conditional on state θ “ θ is denoted by marg Fθp.q “ ř  

> s´iPSN´1

Fθp., s ´iq. Every signal realization Xi “ s generates a posterior distribution over Θ obtained using Bayes rule. That is, for any T Ď Θ, 

μpsqp T q “ 

ř 

> θPT

μ0pθqmarg Fθpsq

ř 

> θPΘ

μ0pθqmarg Fθpsq

We assume that ř 

> θPΘ

μ0pθqmarg Fθpsq ą 0 for all s P S. Conditional on θ “ θ, as before, for any i and j ‰ i, and any K Ă S, we define Fθs p¨q P ∆pSq by 

Fθs pKq :“ P rob pXj P K|Xi “ s, θ “ θq.

In particular, Fθs ps1q means Fθs pt Xj “ s1uq . Exchangeability of Fθ implies that we need not index these conditional distributions with player identities. The net payoff of each player takes the following form. 

dpA´i, θ q “ αpθq ` βpθqhpA´iq, (2) for some affine, increasing hp¨q and βp¨q ě 0. We make an assumption similar to Assumption 1. 

Assumption 2: [Payoff-relevant state ] For every i P N and θ ‰ θ1, there is 

A´i such that dpA´i, θ q ‰ dpA´i, θ 1q.

> 14 In fact, under certain regularity conditions, the maximal and minimal equilibria in these settings are in cutoff strategies (see Morris and Shin, 2003, for a survey).

15 Notice that unlike in the games described in Section 3.1, players’ payoffs do not depend on their idiosyncratic type. Rather, this is a “common-value” environment, where payoffs depend on a common unknown state. 

Definition 5 (Common-value Affine Coordination games ): A game rΓ acalled a common-value affine coordination game when the payoff difference can be described by Equation (2) , with increasing and affine hp¨q and non-negative 

βp¨q .

There are many applications with this payoff structure. A famous example is a currency attack game ` a la Morris and Shin (1998). Speculators simultaneously decide whether or not to attack a fixed exchange rate regime by selling the currency short. The payoff from not shorting is upai “ 1, A ´i, θ q “ 0 and the payoff from shorting is upai “ 0, A ´i, θ q “ bpθqp 1 ´ ppθ, A ´iqq ´ cp pθ, A ´iq, where ppθ, A ´iq

is the probability that the currency will not be devalued, bpθq ą 0 is the benefit when the currency is devalued, and c is the cost when it is not devalued. This gives dpA´i, θ q “ p bpθq ` cqppθ, A ´iq ´ bpθq. Let ppθ, A ´iq “ pθθ ` pAhpA´iq. The currency is less likely to be devalued when the currency is stronger ( pθ ą 0) and fewer speculators short ( hpA´iq affine and increasing and pA ą 0). Then, 

dpA´i, θ q “ pθpbpθq ` cqθ ´ bpθqlooooooooooomooooooooooon 

> αpθq

` pApbpθq ` cqloooooomoooooon 

> βpθqą 0

¨hpA´iq.

Similar payoff structures arise in other games with strategic complementarity like debt rollover problems (e.g., Morris and Shin (2004)) or bank runs (e.g.,Goldstein and Pauzner (2005)) when the probability of the borrower or the bank surviving is ppθ, A ´iq “ pθθ ` pAhpA´iq.

> Equilibrium

We restrict attention to symmetric Bayes Nash Equilibrium in pure strategies (henceforth, equilibrium). Under distribution F, a strategy profile where each player plays σ : S Ñ t 0, 1u constitutes an equilibrium if 

σpsq “ 1 ùñ ErdpA´i, , θq| s, σ ; Fs ě 0

σpsq “ 0 ùñ ErdpA´i, θq| s, σ ; Fs ď 0.

> Cutoff Strategies

As is customary in many applications, we focus on equilibria in cut-off strategies. 

Definition 6: We say a strategy σ is a cutoff equilibrium if there is a cutoff ˜s

such that P pσq “ t s P S : s ě ˜su and N P pσq “ SzP pσq. Let EprΓ, Fq denote the set of cutoff equilibria given any common-value affine coordination game rΓ and information structure F.

16 Recall that, Fp¨q “ ř 

> θ

μ0pθqFθp¨q . Define 

VpΓ, Fq :“ max 

> σPEpΓ,Fq

FpP pσqq 

to be the maximal equilibrium participation. Similarly, define 

UpΓ, Fq :“ min 

> σPEpΓ,Fq

FpP pσqq “ 1 ´ max 

> σPEpΓ,Fq

FpN P pσqq 

to be the minimal equilibrium participation. If EpΓ, Fq “ H , then we set VpΓ, Fq “ 

0 and UpΓ, Fq “ 1. 

## 3.4. Contour-CAD and Cutoff Equilibria 

We show below that in this class of games, increasing similarity in the contour CAD order implies an increase in the set of cut-off equilibria, and the converse is also true under an additional regularity condition. 

Definition 7 (Affine independence ): An information structure F is affinely independent if the set of posteriors μpsq it generates is affinely independent. That is, 

ÿ

> sPS

λsμpsq “ 0 and ÿ

> sPS

λs “ 0 ùñ λs “ 0@s P S.

Theorem 2: Let F “ p FθqθPΘ and G “ p GθqθPΘ be two distributions with identical marginal distributions for any θ P Θ.1. If Fθ ěcCAD Gθ for all θ with Fθ ‰ Gθ then EprΓ, Fq Ě EprΓ, Gq for all common-value affine coordination games rΓ.2. Suppose G (and hence F) is affinely independent. Let T Ď Θ be such that 

Fθ ‰ Gθ iff θ P T . Then, the following are equivalent. (a) Fθ ěcCAD Gθ @θ P T .(b) EprΓ, Fq Ě EprΓ, Gq for all common-value affine coordination games rΓ.(c) VprΓ, Fq ě VprΓ, Gq and UprΓ, Fq ď UprΓ, Gq for all common-value affine coordination games rΓ.

The proof of Theorem 2 is in the appendix. Below we explain why we impose the condition of affine independence of the posteriors μp¨q , that we did not need in proving Theorems 1. For part p2q, we want to show that if Fθ ğcCAD Gθ for some θ P Θ, then we can construct a common value coordination game rΓ such that EprΓ; Gq Ę EprΓ; Fq. If Fθ ğcCAD Gθ, then we have a signal s and a contour set psÒ such that s P psÒ and Fθs ppsÒq ă GθppsÒq.15 To prove the analogous parts of   

> 15 Alternatively, a contour set psÓwith an analogous implication that we choose to omit in this discussion for the sake of brevity.

17 Theorems 1, we used the dependence of the payoff on the private signal βp¨q to construct a game such that the desired equilibrium set inclusion fails. Now, βp¨q 

depends only on the common θ, and so we cannot use the same approach. To see how affine independence is useful, consider three affinely independent points ty1, y 2, y 3u. Partition this set into two disjoint sets, K1, K 2. We can draw a supporting hyperplane passing through any point from ty1, y 2, y 3u that separates 

K1 and K2 (see Figure 3). In the proof, we consider affinely independent posterior beliefs. A general separation lemma then allows us to construct a hyperplane through μpsq to separate the set of posteriors below ps, from the set of posteriors above ps (i.e., in psÒ other than s). Formally, we can define α : Θ Ñ R such that, max  

> s1ăps

Eμps1qrαpθqs ă Eμpsqrαpθqs ă min 

> s1PpsÒ,s 1‰s

Eμps1qrαpθqs .

Using αp¨q defined above, and βpθ1q “ 1θ1“θ we can construct a game rΓ such that 

σps1q “ 1s1ěps is an equilibrium in Γ under G but not under F leading to a desired contradiction. This argument also suggests that affine independence may not be the weakest requirement on the set of posteriors. 

y1 y2

y3

Supporting hyperplane through y1 separating 

ty1, y 2u from ty3u.

y1 y2

y3

Supporting hyperplane through y2 separating 

ty2, y 3u from ty1u.

s1 s2

s3

Supporting hyperplane through y3 separating 

ty1, y 3u from ty2u.Figure 3: Illustration of supporting hyperplanes separating sets of points. A commonly studied special case of this setting is the separable environment, in which β is a state-independent constant. In the appendix A.4, we show that Theorem 2 continues to hold in the separable environment. However, the difference is that we do not need the signals to be more similar in each state (i.e., Fθ ěcCAD 

Gθ), but only in expectation. 

Remark 1: A large global games literature following Morris and Shin (2002) has explored the impact of a new public signal on coordination. The main difference is that unlike a new public signal, CAD similarity does not change an agent’s belief about the underlying state since the marginal distribution of signals remain the same. However, a higher CAD similarity expands the set of signals where agents have common p-belief that θ P E for any E Ă Θ. To see this, note that the set of types who p-believes θ P E, i.e., P pθ P E|sq ą p, remains the same. Let’s call this S1. However, after information becomes more CAD-similar, any type in S1

believes that the other player is more likely to p-believe θ P E. So, the set of types 

18 in S1 who p-believe that the other player p-believes θ P E expands. Let’s call this 

S2. Similarly, S3 expands and so on. Since the common p-belief that θ P E is the intersection of all these sets, it also expands. 

# 4. Applications 

Theorems 1 and 2 make the case for CAD orders by showing the equivalence of CAD-similarity and strategic similarity in canonical coordination games. This equivalence makes the CAD-orders particularly well-suited to compare information similarity in Bayesian games. In this section, we show how CAD orders can be used to derive economically meaningful predictions even in settings much beyond the games considered so far. 

## 4.1. Does more similar information improve welfare? 

We now revisit the bank run example introduced earlier. Our theorems demon-strate that greater similarity in information encourages agents to adopt the same strategy, which in turn increases the maximal run and decreases the minimal run across all equilibria. This raises the question of regulatory intervention: should a regulator increase or decrease information similarity to prevent bank runs? The appropriate intervention depends on equilibrium selection. For instance, if the regulator anticipates the agents will play the adversarial (maximal run) equilibrium then she prefers lesser homogenization of information. To see this, consider the example in the introduction. There is an equilibrium in which a player only stays when she sees signal 32 if 

ÿ

> θ

P

ˆ

θ

ˇˇˇˇsi “ 12

˙ ˆ 

θ ` P

ˆ

sj “ 32

ˇˇˇˇsi “ 12, θ 

˙

´ 1

˙loooooooooooooooooooomoooooooooooooooooooon  

> Expected payoff from staying in state θ

ď 0.

The above inequality implies that a player who sees signal si “ 12 prefers running if the other player only stays when she sees sj “ 32 . Consider an information structure G in which the above inequality is not satisfied. However, suppose in-formation becomes more cCAD similar in state θ “ 12 and remains unchanged in other states. Then, a player who receives signal si “ 12 assigns a lower probability that the other player sees a signal sj “ 32 if the state is θ “ 12 , which decreases her incentive to stay. A sufficient decrease can satisfy the above inequality, thus creating an equilibrium in which a player only stays when she sees signal 32 . Thus, expected number of players who will run on the bank under the adversarial equi-librium has increased after the information becomes more cCAD similar. Thus, if the regulator anticipates that agent will play the adversarial equilibrium, then in the above example, the expected number of players who run on the bank increases after the information becomes more cCAD similar, making lesser homogenization 19 of information desirable. Conversely, if the social planner anticipates the agents will play the advanta-geous (minimal run) equilibrium then she prefers greater homogenization of infor-mation. To see this, consider the equilibrium in which a player only runs when she sees signal ´12 . This is an equilibrium if 

ÿ

> θ

P

ˆ

θ

ˇˇˇˇsi “ 12

˙ ˆ 

θ ` P

ˆ

sj P t 12, 32u

ˇˇˇˇsi “ 12, θ 

˙

´ 1

˙looooooooooooooooooooooomooooooooooooooooooooooon  

> Expected payoff from staying in state θ

ě 0.

The above inequality implies that a player who sees signal si “ 12 prefers staying if the other player stays when she sees sj P t 12 , 32 u. Consider an information structure 

G in which the above inequality is not satisfied. However, suppose information becomes more cCAD similar in state θ “ 12 and remains unchanged in other states. Then, a player who receives signal si “ 12 assigns a higher probability that the other player sees a signal sj P t 12 , 32 u if the state is θ “ 12 , which increases her incentive to stay. A sufficient increase can satisfy the above inequality, thus creating an equilibrium in which a player only runs when she sees signal ´12 . Thus, if the regulator anticipates that agent will play the advantageous equilibrium, then in the above example, the expected number of players who run on the bank decreases after the information becomes more cCAD similar, making greater homogenization of information desirable. 

## 4.2. Beyond affine coordination games 

Next, we move from affine and increasing hp¨q to simply increasing hp¨q . We define a stronger notion of similarity that we call Strong Concentration Along the Diagonal (sCAD) . We say information structure F is more similar than G, or is greater in the strong CAD order, if any agent i believes, conditional on her realized signal s, that the number of other agents with the a similar signal (signal in any set 

K that contains s) is higher in the sense of first-order stochastic dominance under 

F than G. Under CAD, this ranking was only in terms of expectation. We show, analogous to our first result that increasing similarity of information in the sCAD order is equivalent to expanding the set of equilibria in the class of private-value coordination games for any increasing hp¨q .

Theorem 3: For any two joint distributions F and G, F ěsCAD G if and only if 

EpΓ, Fq Ě EpΓ, Gq for all private-value coordination games Γ.

20 4.3. Similarity and Congestion 

Consider a binary-action game of strategic substitutability in which N players simultaneously choose between actions 0 or 1, and the payoff difference 

dpA´i, s iq :“ upai “ 1, A´i, s iq ´ upai “ 0, A´i, s iq “ αpsiq ` βpsiqhpA´iq (3) decreases in the aggregate action, that is, βp.q ă 0. Since βp¨q ă 0 for all s P

S, the game Γ exhibits strategic substitutability. Henceforth, we refer to such symmetric binary-action games of strategic substitutability simply as congestion games . In contrast to coordination games, a player in a congestion game has a 

smaller incentive to play action 1 if more of the other players play action 1. 

Definition 8 ((Affine) Congestion Games ): A game ˆΓ a called a conges-tion game when the payoff difference can be described by Equation (3) , with increasing hp¨q and negative βp¨q . The congestion game ˆΓ is said to be affine if 

hp¨q is affine. 

A classic example is an entry game in a market with capacity constraints. A firm suffers when more firms enter making the market more congested (see Duffy and Hopkins, 2005). The conflict game of Baliga and Sj¨ ostr¨ om (2012) is another interesting example in which a country wants to be aggressive whenever its opponent is peaceful and vice versa. A public good contribution game in which an agent’s contribution to the public good matters less for successful public good provision when more agents contribute also exhibits strategic substitutability (see Harrison and Jara-Moroni, 2021). We can establish equivalence results that are analogous to our main results: More CAD-similar information shrinks the set of symmetric pure strategy BNE in congestion games. 

Proposition 2: Let F and G be two joint distributions over SN .1. F ěCAD G if and only if EpΓ, Fq Ď EpΓ, Gq for all affine congestion games 

ˆΓ.2. F ěsCAD G if and only if EpΓ, Fq Ď EpΓ, Gq for all congestion games ˆΓ.

## 4.4. Similarity and Collective Action 

Recent public discourse and research in political science suggests that social me-dia or access to the same information has enabled larger mass protests. 16 Protests are fundamentally collective action problems: Protesting is costly and a successful regime change requires a sufficient number of people to take this costly action, while the benefit of regime change accrues to all. So, while people want to co-ordinate to ensure a successful mass protest, they are also tempted to free-ride. Importantly, unlike the games we studied so far in this paper, collective action 

> 16 See Manacorda and Tesei (2020), Qin et al. (2024) for example.

21 games do not exhibit strategic complementarity. Moreover, equilibrium may not be symmetric. In a different paper Basak et al. (Forthcoming), we show that the notion of CAD can still be used to characterize when increased information similarity helps or harms participation in a collective action game of incomplete information. The main insight is that more similar information about the fun-damentals in the sense of increased CAD is a double-edged sword: It can help agents coordinate, but can also exacerbate free-riding. We show that more similar information facilitates (impedes) collective action when achieving regime change is sufficiently challenging (easy). 

## 4.5. Similarity and Auctions 

A classical question in auction theory (e.g., Milgrom and Weber (1982)) is how different auction formats compare in terms of revenue, when players’ valuations are more interdependent. We can use the tools developed in this paper to answer a related question: Given an auction format, how does revenue change if player valuations become more similar? For example, below, we show that the revenue from a second-price auction unambiguously increases when players’ valuations become more similar in the CAD order. Consider a second-price auction for a single object with two bidders. Bidder valuations are drawn from a finite set S. Let F and G be two different joint distributions over the bidder valuations. Let Rp¨q denote the expected revenue from the second-price auction given a joint distribution, when bidders report their valuations truthfully. Truthful reporting is weakly dominant strategy in this en-vironment. The result below shows that when bidder valuations are more similar in the sense of an increase in the CAD order, then the expected revenue in the second-price auction is higher. The proof is in the appendix. 

Proposition 3: If F ěCAD G, then RpFq ě RpGq.

## 4.6. Games with non-exchangeable signal distributions 

Our baseline setting features a lot of symmetry: Player identities are not payoff-relevant and the joint distribution over agents’ signals is exchangeable. In Ap-pendix B.1, we relax these symmetry assumptions. We consider a class of binary-action coordination games in which payoffs depend on a weighted aggregate action by others (with identity-specific weights) and allow for non-exchangeable signal distributions. We define an analogous notion of CAD for non-exchangeable joint distributions, and derive a characterization analogous to Theorem 1. 

# References 

G.-M. Angeletos and A. Pavan. Efficient use of information and social value of information. Econometrica , 75(4):1103–1142, 2007. 7 22 M. S. Anwar, G. Schoenebeck, and P. S. Dhillon. Filter bubble or homogenization? disentangling the long-term effects of recommendations on user consumption patterns. In Proceedings of the ACM on Web Conference 2024 , pages 123–134, 2024. 2 G. Aridor, D. Goncalves, and S. Sikdar. Deconstructing the filter bubble: User decision-making and recommender systems. In Proceedings of the 14th ACM conference on recommender systems , pages 82–91, 2020. 2 Y. Awaya and V. Krishna. Commonality of information and commonality of beliefs. Theoretical Economics , Forthcoming, 2025. 7, 45 S. Baliga and T. Sj¨ ostr¨ om. The strategy of manipulating conflict. American Economic Review , 102(6):2897–2922, 2012. 21 D. Basak, J. Deb, and A. Kuvalekar. Similarity of information and collective action. The American Economic Review , Forthcoming. 6, 22 D. Bergemann and S. Morris. Robust predictions in games with incomplete infor-mation. Econometrica , 81(4):1251–1308, 2013. 7 D. Bergemann and S. Morris. Bayes correlated equilibrium and the comparison of information structures in games. Theoretical Economics , 11(2):487–522, 2016. 7, 11 A. J. Chaney, B. M. Stewart, and B. E. Engelhardt. How algorithmic confounding in recommendation systems increases homogeneity and decreases utility. In 

Proceedings of the 12th ACM conference on recommender systems , pages 224– 232, 2018. 2 I.-H. Cheng and A. Hsiaw. Reporting sexual misconduct in the# metoo era. 

American Economic Journal: Microeconomics , 14(4):761–803, 2022. 12 X. Cheng and T. Borgers. Diversity, disagreement, and information aggregation. Technical report, Working paper, 2024. 7 J. Cherry and L. Smith. Strategically valuable information. Available at SSRN 2722234 , 2012. 7 R. T. Clemen and R. L. Winkler. Limits for the precision and value of information from dependent sources. Operations Research , 33(2):427–442, 1985. 7 J. A. Cookson, C. Fox, J. Gil-Bazo, J. F. Imbet, and C. Schiller. Social media as a bank run catalyst. Available at SSRN , 4422754, 2023. 2 M. W. Cripps, J. C. Ely, G. J. Mailath, and L. Samuelson. Common learning. 

Econometrica , 76(4):909–933, 2008. 7 23 H. de Oliveira, Y. Ishii, and X. Lin. Robust aggregation of correlated information. Technical report, Working Paper, 2023. 7 J. Duffy and E. Hopkins. Learning, information, and sorting in market entry games: theory and evidence. Games and Economic behavior , 51(1):31–62, 2005. 21 L. G. Epstein and S. M. Tanny. Increasing generalized correlation: a definition and some economic consequences. Canadian Journal of Economics , pages 16–34, 1980. 7 J. Farrell and P. Klemperer. Coordination and lock-in: Competition with switching costs and network effects. Handbook of industrial organization , 3:1967–2072, 2007. 12 J. Farrell and G. Saloner. Installed base and compatibility: Innovation, product preannouncements, and predation. The American economic review , pages 940– 955, 1986. 13 Y. K. Gam, C. Liu, and Y. Xu. Does social media make banks more fragile? evidence from twitter. Evidence from Twitter (November 18, 2023) , 2023. 2 I. Goldstein and A. Pauzner. Demand–deposit contracts and the probability of bank runs. the Journal of Finance , 60(3):1293–1327, 2005. 12, 16 O. Gossner. Comparison of information structures. Games and Economic Behav-ior , 30(1):44–63, 2000. 7 R. Harrison and P. Jara-Moroni. Global games with strategic substitutes. Inter-national Economic Review , 62(1):141–173, 2021. 21 J. Hirshleifer. The private and social value of information and the reward to inventive activity. The American Economic Review , 61(4):561–574, 1971. 7 M. K. Jensen. Distributional comparative statics. The Review of Economic Stud-ies , 85(1):581–610, 2018. 7 H. Joe. Multivariate models and multivariate dependence concepts . CRC press, 1997. 7 M. L. Katz and C. Shapiro. Network externalities, competition, and compatibility. 

The American economic review , 75(3):424–440, 1985. 13 K. A. Konrad and T. B. Stolper. Coordination and the fight against tax havens. 

Journal of International Economics , 103:96–107, 2016. 12 M. Manacorda and A. Tesei. Liberation technology: Mobile phones and political mobilization in africa. Econometrica , 88(2):533–567, 2020. 21 24 T. Mekonnen and R. L. Vizca´ ıno. Bayesian comparative statics. Theoretical Eco-nomics , 17(1):219–251, 2022. 7 M. Meyer and B. Strulovici. Increasing interdependence of multivariate distribu-tions. Journal of Economic Theory , 147(4):1460–1489, 2012. 4, 6, 7, 43 M. Meyer and B. Strulovici. Beyond correlation: Measuring interdependence through complementarities. Working paper , 2015. 4, 6, 7, 44 M. A. Meyer. Interdependence in multivariate distributions: stochastic dominance theorems and an application to the measurement of ex post inequality under uncertainty . Nuffield College, 1990. 4, 6, 8, 40 P. R. Milgrom and R. J. Weber. A theory of auctions and competitive bidding. 

Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric Society , pages 1089–1122, 1982. 22 S. Morris and H. S. Shin. Unique equilibrium in a model of self-fulfilling currency attacks. American Economic Review , pages 587–597, 1998. 12, 16 S. Morris and H. S. Shin. Social value of public information. The American economic review , 92(5):1521–1534, 2002. 7, 18 S. Morris and H. S. Shin. Global Games: Theory and Applications , volume 1 of 

Econometric Society Monographs , pages 56–114. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2003. 15 S. Morris and H. S. Shin. Coordination risk and the price of debt. European Economic Review , 48(1):133–153, 2004. 16 S. Morris, H. S. Shin, and M. Yildiz. Common belief foundations of global games. 

Journal of Economic Theory , 163:826–848, 2016. 5, 12, 46 A. M¨ uller and M. Scarsini. Some remarks on the supermodular order. Journal of multivariate analysis , 73(1):107–119, 2000. 4 A. M¨ uller and D. Stoyan. Comparison methods for stochastic models and risks ,volume 389. Wiley, 2002. 4, 7 E. Nechushtai, R. Zamith, and S. C. Lewis. More of the same? homogenization in news recommendations when users search on google, youtube, facebook, and twitter. Mass Communication and Society , 27(6):1309–1335, 2024. 2 T. T. Nguyen, P.-M. Hui, F. M. Harper, L. Terveen, and J. A. Konstan. Exploring the filter bubble: the effect of using recommender systems on content diversity. In Proceedings of the 23rd international conference on World wide web , pages 677–686, 2014. 2 B. Qin, D. Str¨ omberg, and Y. Wu. Social media and collective action in china. 

Econometrica , 92(6):1993–2026, 2024. 21 25 J. Sakovics and J. Steiner. Who matters in coordination problems? American Economic Review , 102(7):3439–3461, 2012. 12 M. Shadmehr and D. Bernhardt. Collective action with uncertain payoffs: coor-dination, public signals, and punishment dilemmas. American Political Science Review , 105(4):829–851, 2011. 12 X. Vives. Strategic complementarity, fragility, and regulation. The Review of Financial Studies , 27(12):3547–3592, 2014. 12 

# A. Appendix: Proofs 

## A.1. Proof of Lemma 1 

Proof. First, we prove that 1. ðñ 2. Suppose that F ěCAD G and for some 

K and s P K and i, j , we have P rob pXj P K|Xi “ sq ă P rob pYj P K|Yi “ sq.Then, at least for some s1 R K, P rob pXj “ s1|Xi “ sq ă P rob pYj “ s1|Yi “ sq,contradicting F ěCAD G. For the converse, suppose that the inequality holds for all i, j , s and K Q s, but F ńCAD G. Then, for some s1 ‰ s, P rob pXj “ s1|Xi “

sq ą P rob pYj “ s1|Yi “ sq. But then, K “ Szt s1u would have 

P rob pXj P K|Xi “ sq ą P rob pYj P K|Yi “ sq,

a contradiction. Next, we prove 1. ðñ 3. F ěCAD G

ðñ P rob pXj P K

ˇˇˇˇXi “ sq ě P rob pYj P K

ˇˇˇˇYi “ sq @s, K Q s, 

ðñ E

„

1Xj PK

ˇˇˇˇXi “ s

ȷ

ě E

„

1Yj PK

ˇˇˇˇYi “ s

ȷ

@s, K Q s. 

ðñ p N ´ 1qE

„

1Xj PK

ˇˇˇˇXi “ s

ȷ

ě p N ´ 1qE

„

1Yj PK

ˇˇˇˇYi “ s

ȷ

@s, K Q s. 

ðñ E

«ÿ

> j‰i

1Xj PK

ˇˇˇˇXi “ s

ff 

ě E

«ÿ

> j‰i

1Yj PK

ˇˇˇˇYi “ s

ff 

@s, K Q s. 

## A.2. Proof of Theorem 1 

Step 1: p1q ùñ p 2q

Suppose that F ěCAD G. Let σ P EpΓ, Gq for some game Γ with βpsq ě 0 for all s P S. We show that σ remains an equilibrium under the more CAD similar information structure F, i.e., σ P EpΓ, Fq.26 Since σ constitutes an equilibrium under G, (IC:P) must hold for any s P P pσq,and (IC:NP) must hold for any s P N P pσq. Fix an agent i. We compare the net payoffs from taking action a “ 1 under F and G.

ErdpA´i, s q| s, σ ; Fs ´ ErdpA´i, s q| s, σ ; Gs“βpsq r ErhpA´iq| s, σ ; Fs ´ ErhpA´iq| s, σ ; Gss .

Since hp¨q is affine and increasing, hpyq “ ky ` l for some k ą 0. So we can rewrite the above as follows: 

“kβ psq

ˆ

E

„

A´i

ˇˇˇˇs, σ ; F

ȷ

´ E

„

A´i

ˇˇˇˇs, σ ; G

ȷ˙ 

“kβ psq

˜

E

«ÿ

> j‰i

1Xj PP pσq

ˇˇˇˇs; F

ff 

´ E

«ÿ

> j‰i

1Xj PP pσq

ˇˇˇˇs; G

ff¸ 

“βpsqk

„

E

„

IpP pσqq 

ˇˇˇˇs; F

ȷ

´ E

„

IpP pσqq 

ˇˇˇˇs; G

ȷȷ 

,

where, recall that IpP pσqq counts the number of players other than player i with signal in set P pσq. By Lemma 1 and since βpsq ě 0@s P S, the above expression is non-negative for s P P pσq and non-positive for s P N P pσq. Therefore, for strategy profile σ, we have 

ErdpA´i, s q| s, σ ; Fs ´ ErdpA´i, s q| s, σ ; Gs ě 0 if s P P pσqď 0 if s P N P pσq (4) Therefore, (IC:P) continues to hold for all s P P pσq under F and (IC:NP) holds for all s P N P pσq under F.

Step 2: p2q ùñ p 3q, p4q

Since F and G have the same marginals, and for any Γ, EpΓ, Fq Ě EpΓ, Gq,

VpΓ, Fq “ max 

> σPEpΓ,Fq

FpP pσqq ě max 

> σPEpΓ,Gq

GpP pσqq “ VpΓ, Gq

UpΓ, Fq “ min 

> σPEpΓ,Fq

FpP pσqq ď min 

> σPEpΓ,Gq

GpP pσqq “ UpΓ, Gq.

Step 3: p3q ùñ p1q

Suppose that VpΓ, Fq ě VpΓ, Gq for all Γ with βpsq ě 0 for all s P S, but 

F ńCAD G. Therefore, Ds˚ P S and K Q s˚ such that, 

FpXj P K|Xi “ s˚q ă GpXj P K|Xi “ s˚q.

The proof approach will be to establish a contradiction by constructing a game Γ, 27 and a strategy profile σ such that the following hold: (i) σ P EpΓ, Gq with P pσq “ K,(ii) VpΓ, Gq “ GpP pσqq ą GpP pσ1qq for all σ1 P EpΓ, Gq with σ1 ‰ σ,(iii) σ R EpΓ, Fq, and (iv) no σ1 P EpΓ, Fq such that FpP pσ1qq ě FpP pσqq .Consider a game Γ with: 

αpsq “

$’&’%

´2 if s R K

´Gs˚ pKq if s “ s˚,

1 otherwise. 

hpA´iq “ A´i,βpsq “ 1  

> N´1

.

Under these parameters, ErdpA´i, s q| s; Gq “ αpsq ` βpsqErA´i|s; Gs “ αpsq ` 

GspKq. Consider the strategy σ with P pσq “ K. For all s P S,

ErdpA´i, s |s, Gqs “ 

$’&’%

´2 ` GspKq ă 0 if s R K

´Gs˚ pKq ` Gs˚ pKq “ 0 if s “ s˚

1 ` GspKq ą 0 if s P K, s ‰ s˚.

Therefore, under G, (IC:P) and (IC:NP) are satisfied, so σ P EpΓ, Gq. This gives us feature (i). Furthermore, for any s R K, regardless of the strategy others play, 

ErdpA´i, s |s, Gqs ă 0.

This means participation is a dominated strategy for these types, which makes σ

the maximal equilibrium, i.e., VpΓ, Gq “ GpP pσqq . This gives us feature (ii). Recall that for type s˚, FpXj P K|Xi “ s˚q ă GpXj P K|Xi “ s˚q. Therefore, 

E rdpA´i, s ˚q | s˚; Fs “ Fs˚ pKq ´ Gs˚ pKq ă 0,

This means while type s˚ in indifferent under G, she strictly prefers not partici-pation under F. Thus, σ R EpΓ, Fq. This gives us feature (iii). Since participation is a dominated strategy for any s R K (regardless of the in-formation structure), there is no other equilibrium under F which leads to greater participation that FpP pσqq . This gives us feature (iv). Finally, since F and G has the same marginal distribution, it follows from the above steps that VpΓ, Fq ď FpP pσqq “ GpP pσqq “ VpΓ, Gq, which contradicts p3q.28 Step 4: p4q ùñ p1q

This argument is similar to Step 3. If (1) is not true, then Ds˚ P S and K Q s˚

such that, FpXj P K|Xi “ s˚q ă GpXj P K|Xi “ s˚q. Let Kc :“ SzK. Then, 

FpXj P Kc|Xi “ s˚q ą GpXj P Kc|Xi “ s˚q.

The proof approach will be to establish a contradiction by constructing a game Γ, and a strategy profile σ such that the following hold: (i) σ P EpΓ, Gq with P pσq “ Kc,(ii) UpΓ, Gq “ GpP pσqq ă GpP pσ1qq for all σ1 P EpΓ, Gq with σ1 ‰ σ,(iii) σ R EpΓ, Fq, and (iv) no σ1 P EpΓ, Fq such that FpP pσ1qq ď FpP pσqq .As before, consider the following game: 

αpsq “ 

$’&’%

1 if s P Kc

´Gs˚ pKcq if s “ s˚

´2 otherwise 

βpsq “ 1

N ´ 1

hpA´iq “ A´i.

Let σ be the strategy profile with participation set P pσq “ Kc. Then, 

ErdpA´i, s |s, Gqs “ 

$’&’%

1 ` GspKcq ą 0 if s P Kc

´Gs˚ pKcq ` Gs˚ pKcq “ 0 if s “ s˚

´2 ` GspKcq ă 0 if s R Kc, s ‰ s˚.

Therefore, σ P EpΓ, Gq. This gives us feature (i). Note that not participation is a dominated strategy for any type s P Kc since regardless of what others play, ErdpA´i, s |s; Gqs ě αpsq ą 0. This makes σ the minimal participation equilibrium. This gives us feature (ii). However, 

ErdpA´i, s ˚|s˚, Fqs “ ´ Gs˚ pKcq ` Fs˚ pKcq ą 0.

This means while type s˚ was indifferent under G, she strictly prefers participation under F. Therefore, σ is no longer an equilibrium under F. This gives us feature (iii). Since, regardless of the information structure, any type s P Kc always partic-ipates, the minimal participation under F must be at least FpP pσqq . This gives us feature (iv). Finally, since F and G has the same marginals, it follows from the above steps 29 that and UpΓ, Fq ě FpP pσqq “ GpP pσqq “ UpΓ, Gq, which contradicts (4). 

## A.3. Proof of Theorem 2 

We first establish a useful property of affine independence. 

Lemma 2: Let x P Rn and K, L, Ă Rn be two finite, disjoint sets such that, 

x R K Ť L and K Ť L Ťtxu is affinely independent. Then, D⃗ λ P Rn such that 

max  

> kPK

λ1k ă λ1x ă min  

> lPL

λ1l. 

Proof. Since K Ť L Ťtxu is affinely independent, tk ´ x : k P Ku Ťtl ´ x : l P Lu

is linearly independent. Complete this set to a basis, tx1, . . . , x nu and define a linear map as follows: 

T pxiq :“

$’&’%

´1 if xi “ k ´ x for some k P K

1 if xi “ l ´ x for some l P L

0 if xi P T z tt k ´ x : k P Ku Ťtl ´ x : l P Luu .T pyq for any y is defined using the above basis vectors. By definition, T pk ´ xq “ 

T pkq ´ T pxq “ ´ 1 ùñ T pkq ă T pxq for all k P K and T pl ´ xq “ T plq ´ T pxq “ 

1 ùñ T plq ą T pxq for all l P L. Finally, by the Riesz representation theorem, 

Dλ P Rn such that T pyq “ λ1y for all y P Rn.

Proof of Theorem 2. To prove p1q, define T Ď Θ with F “ Gθ for all θ P ΘzT ,and suppose that Fθ ěcCAD Gθ for all θ P T . Consider a common-value affine coordination game Γ. Affine, increasing hp¨q means hpxq “ kx ` l for some k ě 0. Suppose that σ is a cutoff equilibrium under G with a cutoff ˜ s. Therefore, 

E rdpA´i, θq| s, σ ; Gs ě 0 @s ě ˜s

E rdpA´i, θq| s, σ ; Gs ď 0 @s ă ˜s

For any s,

E rdpA´i, θq| s; σ, Fs ´ E rdpA´i, θq| s; σ, Gs“ E rαpθq ` βpθqhpA´iq| s; σ, Fs ´ r αpθq ` βpθqhpA´iq| s; σ, Gs“ E “βpθqkE “A´i|θ, Fθ‰ˇ ˇs; σ‰ ´ E “βpθqkE “A´i|θ, Gθ‰ˇ ˇs; σ‰

“ E “βpθqkrFθ 

> s

p˜sÒq ´ Gθ 

> s

p˜sÒqs ˇˇs; σ‰

Since Fθ ěcCAD Gθ for all θ P T and Fθ “ Gθ for all θ R T , the above expression is non-negative if s ě ˜s and non-positive otherwise. This implies that if σ was an equilibrium under G, then it remains an equilibrium under F, because (IC:P) continues to hold for all s ě ˜s, and (IC:NP) continues to hold for all s ă ˜s. Thus, 

σ P EpΓ, Fq, thus proving (1). 30 Towards proving p2q, notice that paq ùñ p bq was proved above, while pbq ùñ pcq is obvious. Therefore, we only need to prove that pcq ùñ p aq.Suppose that pVpΓ, Fq, ´UpΓ, Fqq ě p VpΓ, Gq, ´UpΓ, Gqq for all common-value affine coordination games Γ but, Fθ˚

ğcCAD Gθ˚

for some θ˚ P T . Then there exists ˜ s, ps such that at least one of the following holds: 1. ps ď ˜s and Fθ˚ 

> ˜s

ppsÒq ă Gθ˚ 

> ˜s

ppsÒq, or 2. ps ě ˜s and Fθ˚ 

> ˜s

ppsÓq ă Gθ˚ 

> ˜s

ppsÓq.

Case 1: Suppose ps ď ˜s and Fθ˚ 

> ˜s

ppsÒq ă Gθ˚ 

> ˜s

ppsÒq

We will construct a common-value affine coordination game with payoff functions 

dpA´i, θ q “ αpθq ` βpθqhpA´iq, and a strategy profile σ with 

P pσq “ psÒ and N P pσq “ SzpsÒ, (5) such that, (i) σ P EpΓ, Gq, but σ R EpΓ, Fq.(ii) σ is the equilibrium with maximal participation in G.(iii) No σ1 such that GpP pσ1qq ą GpP pσqq is an equilibrium under F. Since the marginal distribution of F and G coincide, this would complete the proof in Case 1. To this end, define 

A :“t μpsq : s P S, s ă psu

and B :“t μpsq : s P S, s ě ps, s ‰ ˜su.A Ťtμp˜squ Ť B is an affinely independent set. By Lemma 2, there exists rα P RN

such that max 

> μpsqP A

rα1μpsq ă rα1μp˜sq ă min 

> μpsqP B

rα1μpsq.

Notice that rα1μp¨q “ Eμp¨q rrαpθqs . Therefore, Drα : Θ Ñ R such that, max 

> μpsqP A

Eμpsqrrαpθqs ă Eμp˜sqrrαpθqs ă min 

> μpsqP B

Eμpsqrrαpθqs .

Define, for any s,

lpG, s q :“ μpsqp θ˚qGθ˚ 

> s

ppsÒq.

Define, for any k P R,∆1pkq :“ “Eμp˜sqrrαpθqs ` kl pG, ˜sq‰ ´

„

max 

> μpsqP A

Eμpsqrrαpθqs ` k

ȷ

,

and ∆ 2pkq :“ min 

> μpsqP B

“Eμpsqrrαpθqs ` kl pG, s q‰ ´ “Eμp˜sqrrαpθqs ` kl pG, ˜sq‰

Notice that p∆1p0q, ∆2p0qq ą p 0, 0q. By continuity in k, Dk ą 0 such that 31 p∆1pkq, ∆2pkqq ą p 0, 0q. Fix any such k, and choose a scalar a so that 

Eμp˜sqrrαpθq ` as ` kl pG, ˜sq “ 0.

Define 

αp¨q :“ rαp¨q ` a, 

and let 

βpθq “ k

pN ´ 1q1θ“θ˚ .

Consider a common-value affine coordination game Γ with hpxq “ x, pα, β q defined above, and the strategy profile in (5) above. Note that we have max 

> μpsqP A

␣Eμpsqrαpθqs ` kl pG, s q(

ă max 

> μpsqP A

␣Eμpsqrαpθqs ` k(

ă Eμp˜sqrαpθqs ` kl pG, ˜sq“ 0 ă min 

> μpsqP B

␣Eμpsqrαpθqs ` kl pG, s q(

Further, for any s,

Eμpsqrβpθqp N ´ 1qGθ 

> s

ppsÒqs “ kl pG, s q.

Therefore the following conditions are satisfied. max 

> μpsqP A

␣Eμpsqrαpθqs ` Eμpsqrβpθqp N ´ 1qGθ 

> s

ppsÒqs ( ă0

Eμp˜sqrαpθqs ` Eμp˜sqrβpθqp N ´ 1qGθ 

> ˜s

ppsÒqs “ 0 (6) min 

> μpsqP B

␣Eμpsqrαpθqs ` Eμpsqrβpθqp N ´ 1qGθ 

> s

ppsÒqs ( ą0.

Equations (6) simply imply that the strategy P pσq “ psÒ and N P pσq “ SzpsÒ

constitutes an equilibrium under G, i.e., σ P VpΓ, Gq. In particular, (IC:P) holds with an equality for ˜ s, and holds strictly for any s ą ps such that s ‰ ˜s. Finally, notice that, since Fθ˚ 

> ˜s

ppsÒq ă Gθ˚ 

> ˜s

ppsÒq,

Eμp˜sqrαpθqs ` Eμp˜sqrβpθqFθ 

> ˜s

ppsÒqs “ Eμp˜sqrαpθqs ` kμ p˜sqp θ˚qFθ˚ 

> ˜s

ppsÒqă Eμp˜sqrαpθqs ` kl pG, ˜sq “ 0.

Therefore, σ R EpΓ, Fq.Now, we will show that if σ1 is such that P pσ1q Ą P pσq, then σ1 R EpΓ, Fq Ť EpΓ, Gq.To this end, for any such σ1, we have P pσ1q “ s1Ò for some s1 ă ps. For σ1 to be an equilibrium, (IC:P) must be satisfied for all s ě s1. Since, s1 ă ps, s1 P A. However, 32 for all s P A, we have that, 

Eμpsqrαpθqs ` k max tlpG, s q, l pF, s qu ď Eμpsqrαpθqs ` k

ă Eμp˜sqrαpθqs ` kl pG, ˜sq“ 0.

Therefore, (IC:P) cannot be satisfied for any relevant s P A Ş P pσ1q under F or 

G. Hence, if σ1 P EpΓ, Fq, then P pσ1q Ă P pσq. Therefore, VpΓ, Fq ă VpΓ, Gq, a contradiction. 

Case 2: ps ě ˜s and Fθ˚ 

> ˜s

ppsÓq ă Gθ˚ 

> ˜s

ppsÓq:

The proof is nearly identical to the previous case. We will construct a strategy profile σ such that, (i) σ P EpΓ, Gq, but σ R EpΓ, Fq.(ii) σ is the equilibrium with minimal participation in G.(iii) No σ1 such that GpP pσ1qq ă GpP pσq is an equilibrium under F. Since the marginal distribution of F and G coincide, this would complete the proof under Case 2. Define 

A :“t μpsq : s P S, s ď ps, , s ‰ ˜su

and B :“t μpsq : s P S, s ą psu.

Notice that Fθ˚ 

> ˜s

ppsÓq ă Gθ˚ 

> ˜s

ppsÓq ðñ Fθ˚ 

> ˜s

pBq ą Gθ˚ 

> ˜s

pBq since B “ Szt psÓu. As before, because A Ťtμp˜squ Ť B is an affinely independent set, Lemma 2 implies that Drα : Θ Ñ R such that, max 

> μpsqP A

Eμpsqrrαpθqs ă Eμp˜sqrrαpθqs ă min 

> μpsqP B

Eμpsqrrαpθqs .

Define for any s,

lpG, s q :“ μpsqp θ˚qGθ˚ 

> s

pBq

Define, for any k P R,∆1pkq :“

ˆ

pEμp˜sqrrαpθqs ` kl pG, ˜sqq ´ p max 

> μpsqP A

Eμpsqrrαpθqs ` kl pG, s qq 

˙

,

and ∆ 2pkq :“

ˆ

min 

> μpsqP B

Eμpsqrrαpθqs ´ p Eμp˜sqrrαpθqs ` kl pG, ˜sqq 

˙

Notice that p∆1p0q, ∆2p0qq ą p0, 0q. By continuity in k, Dk ą 0 such that 33 p∆1pkq, ∆2pkqq ą p 0, 0q. For any such k, choose a scalar a so that 

Eμp˜sqrrαpθq ` as ` kl pG, ˜sq “ 0.

Define 

αp¨q :“ rαp¨q ` a

and let 

βpθq “ k

pN ´ 1q1θ“θ˚ .

Now define a common-value affine coordination game Γ with hpxq “ x, and pα, β q

as above, and consider the strategy profile σ “ 1B . Note that we have max 

> μpsqP A

␣Eμpsqrαpθqs ` kl pG, s q( ă Eμp˜sqrαpθqs ` kl pG, ˜sq “ 0 ă min 

> μpsqP B

␣Eμpsqrαpθqs (

ď min 

> μpsqP B

␣Eμpsqrαpθqs ` kl pG, s q(

Further note that for any s,

Eμpsqrβpθqp N ´ 1qGθ 

> s

pBqs “ kl pG, s q.

Therefore the following conditions are satisfied. max 

> μpsqP A

␣Eμpsqrαpθqs ` Eμpsqrβpθqp N ´ 1qGθ 

> s

pBqs ( ă0

Eμp˜sqrαpθqs ` Eμp˜sqrβpθqp N ´ 1qGθ 

> ˜s

pBqs “ 0 (7) min 

> μpsqP B

␣Eμpsqrαpθqs ` Eμpsqrβpθqp N ´ 1qGθ 

> s

pBqs ( ą0.

Equations (7) imply that the strategy profile σ “ 1B constitutes an equilibrium under G, i.e., σ P EpΓ, Gq. Moreover, (IC:NP) holds with equality for ˜ s, and strictly for any s ď ps such that s ‰ ˜s. Finally, notice that, since Fθ˚ 

> ˜s

pBq ą Gθ˚ 

> ˜s

pBq,

Eμp˜sqrαpθqs ` Eμp˜sqrβpθqp N ´ 1qGθ 

> ˜s

pBqs “ Eμp˜sqrαpθqs ` kμ p˜sqp θ˚qFθ˚ 

> ˜s

pBqą Eμp˜sqrαpθqs ` kl pG, ˜sq “ 0.

Therefore, σ R EpΓ, Fq.Now, we will show that if P pσ1q Ă B “ P pσq, then σ1 R EpΓ, Fq Ť EpΓ, Gq.Suppose not, i.e., P pσ1q Ă B. Fix a s1 P BzP pσ1q. For σ1 to be an equilibrium, 34 (IC:NP) must be satisfied at s1. However, since s1 P B,

Eμps1qrαpθqs ` k min tlpG, s 1q, l pF, s 1qu ě Eμps1qrαpθqs ą Eμp˜sqrαpθqs ` kl pG, ˜sq“ 0.

Therefore, (IC:NP) cannot be satisfied at s1 under F or G. Therefore, UpΓ, Gq “ 

GpP pσqq . Finally, since σ R EpΓ, Fq, UpΓ, Fq ą UpΓ, Gq, a contradiction. 

## A.4. Contour-CAD and Separable Games 

In this section, we consider a special case of the setting of Section 3.4, where βp¨q 

is independent of the state. We call such games “Separable common value affine coordination games.” The net payoff of a player from taking action a “ 1 in such a game is given by 

dpA´i, θ q “ αpθq ` βh pA´iq.

for some affine, increasing hp¨q and β ě 0. An analog of Theorem 2 holds. The only difference is that we do not need cCAD increase for each state, but only in expectations. 

Theorem 4: Let F and G be two distributions with identical marginal distribu-tions. 1. F ěcCAD G ùñ EpΓ, Fq Ě EpΓ, Gq for all separable common-value affine coordination games Γ.2. Suppose G (and hence F) is affinely independent. Then EpΓ, Fq Ě EpΓ, Gq

for all separable common-value affine coordination games Γ ùñ F ěcCAD 

G.Proof of Theorem 4. The proof approach is similar. We first prove p1q. Suppose that F ěcCAD G. Consider a separable common-value affine coordination game Γ. Let hpxq “ kx ` l for some k ě 0. Suppose that σ is a cutoff equilibrium under G

with a cutoff ˜ s. Therefore, 

E rdpA´i, θq| s, σ ; Gs ě 0 @s ě ˜s

E rdpA´i, θq| s, σ ; Gs ď 0 @s ă ˜s

35 For any s,

E rdpA´i, θq| s, σ ; Fs ´ E rdpA´i, θq| s, σ ; Gs“ E rαpθq ` βh pA´iq| s, σ ; Fs ´ r αpθq ` βh pA´iq| s, σ ; Gs“ βk pE rA´i|s, σ ; Fs ´ E rA´i|s, σ ; Gsq “ βk rFsp˜sÒq ´ Gsp˜sÒqs 

Since F ěcCAD G, the above expression is non-negative if s ě ˜s and non-positive otherwise. This implies that if σ was an equilibrium under G, then it remains an equilibrium under F, because (IC:P) continues to hold for all s ě ˜s, and (IC:NP) continues to hold for all s ă ˜s. Thus, σ P EpΓ, Fq.Next we prove p2q. Suppose that EpΓ, Fq Ě EpΓ, Gq for all separable common-value affine coordination games Γ but F ğcCAD G. Then there exists ˜ s, ps such that at least one of the following holds: 1. ps ď ˜s and F˜sppsÒq ă G˜sppsÒq, or 2. ps ě ˜s and F˜sppsÓq ă G˜sppsÓq.

Case 1: Suppose ps ď ˜s and ps ď ˜s and F˜sppsÒq ă G˜sppsÒq

Define 

A :“ t μpsq : s P S, s ă psu.B :“ t μpsq : s P S, s ě ps, s ‰ ˜su.

Now A Ťtμp˜squ Ť B is an affinely independent set. By Lemma 2, Dλ P RN such that max 

> μpsqP A

λ1μpsq ă λ1μp˜sq ă min 

> μpsqP B

λ1μpsq.

Notice that λ1μp¨q “ Eμp¨q rλθs. Therefore, Dλ : Θ Ñ R such that, max 

> μpsqP A

Eμpsqrλpθqs ă Eμp˜sqrλpθqs ă min 

> μpsqP B

Eμpsqrλpθqs .

Define 

αp¨q :“ λp¨q ´ Eμp˜sqrλpθqs ` min μpsqP B Eμpsqrλpθqs 

2 .

Notice that Eμp˜sqrαpθqs “ Eμp˜sqrλpθqs ´ min μpsqP B Eμpsqrλpθqs 

2 ă 0. Therefore, we have max 

> μpsqP A

Eμpsqrαpθqs ă Eμp˜sqrαpθqs ă 0 ă min 

> μpsqP B

Eμpsqrαpθqs . (8) Define 

β :“ ´ Eμp˜sqrαpθqs 

G˜sppsÒq .

Notice that β ą 0. Also, (8) and the monotonicity of GsppsÒq (in s)36 imply, max 

> μpsqP A

␣Eμpsqrαpθqs ` βGsppsÒq( ă0

Eμp˜sqrαpθqs ` βG˜sppsÒq “ 0 (9) min 

> μpsqP B

␣Eμpsqrαpθqs ` βGsppsÒq( ą0.

Notice that it is possible that GsppsÒq ă G˜sppsÒq. However, the last inequality follows from Eμp˜sqrαpθqs ă 0 ă min μpsq Eμpsqrαpθqs and GsppsÒq ě 0. Consider a separable common-value affine coordination game Γ with hpxq “ x,and pα, β q defined above. Consider a strategy profile σ such that P pσq “ psÒ and 

N P pσq “ SzpsÒ. Then, Equations (9) simply says that this strategy constitutes an equilibrium under G, i.e., σ P EpΓ, Gq. Moreover, (IC:P) holds with an equality for ˜ s, and holds strictly for any s ě ps such that s ‰ ˜s. Finally, notice that 

F˜sppsÒq ă G˜sppsÒq ùñ Eμp˜sqrαpθqs ` βF˜sppsÒq ă 0.

Therefore, σ R EpΓ, Fq, a contradiction. Thus, case 1 cannot hold. 

Case 2: ps ě ˜s and F˜sppsÓq ă G˜sppsÓq:

Define A :“ t μpsq : s P S, s ď ps, , s ‰ ˜su and B :“ t μpsq : s P S, s ą psu. Notice that F˜sppsÓq ă G˜sppsÓq ðñ F˜spBq ą G˜spBq since B “ Szt psÓu.Proceeding as before, we use the fact that A Ťtμp˜squ Ť B is an affinely inde-pendent set. Therefore, by Lemma 2, Dλ : Θ Ñ R such that, max 

> μpsqP A

Eμpsqrλpθqs ă Eμp˜sqrλpθqs ă 0 ă min 

> μpsqP B

Eμpsqrλpθqs .

Let a ą 0 be such that, for all s ď ps, s ‰ ˜s,

a “Eμp˜sqrλpθq ´ Eμpsqrλpθqs ‰ ą max  

> sďps

pGspBq ´ G˜spBqq .

Such an a exists since Eμp˜sqrλpθqs ą max 

> μpsqP A

Eμpsqrλpθqs . Using this a, define αp¨q “ 

aλ p¨q` b where b :“ ´p aEμp˜sqrλpθqs` G˜spBqq . By definition, Eμp˜sqrαpθqs` G˜spBq “ 0. By the choice of a, for all s P A,0 “ Eμp˜sqrαpθqs ` G˜spBq ą Eμpsqrαpθqs ` GspBq.

Finally, by the monotonicity of GspBq (in s), for all s P B,0 “ Eμp˜sqrαpθqs ` G˜spBq ă Eμpsqrαpθqs ` GspBq

Therefore, by letting β :“ 1, we have, 37 max 

> μpsqP A

␣Eμpsqrαpθqs ` βGspBq( ă0

Eμp˜sqrαpθqs ` βG˜spBq “ 0 (10) min 

> μpsqP B

␣Eμpsqrαpθqs ` βGspBq( ą0.

Similar to before, consider a game Γ with hpxq “ x, and pα, β q as obtained above. Notice that the equations (10) are simply (IC:P) and (IC:NP) for the strategy profile σ “ 1B . Thus, σ P EpΓ, Gq. Moreover, (IC:NP) holds with an equality for ˜ s, and holds strictly for any s ď ps such that s ‰ ˜s. Finally, notice that 

F˜spBq ą G˜spBq ùñ Eμp˜sqrαpθqs ` βF˜spBq ą 0.

Therefore, σ R EpΓ, Fq, a contradiction. Thus, case 2 cannot hold either. This completes the proof of Theorem 4. 

## A.5. Proof of Theorem 3 

Proof. The proof approach is identical to that of Theorem 1. First, we establish 

p1q ùñ p 2q. Since F ěsCAD G for all increasing hp¨q ,

ErhpA´iq| s; Fs ě ErhpA´iq| s; Gs for all s P S.

Given any σ, we can replicating the same argument, to obtain: If βpsq ě 0 @s P S,

ErdpA´i, s q| s, σ ; Fs ´ ErdpA´i, s q| s, σ ; Gs ě 0 if s P P pσqď 0 if s P N P pσq

Therefore, for all Γ, if βpsq ě 0 for all s P S, then σ P EpΓ, Gq ùñ σ P EpΓ, Fq.Next, we establish p2q ùñ p 1q. We only sketch the argument for p2q ùñ p 1q,as the logic is very similar to that in Theorem 1. Suppose that EpΓ, Fq Ě EpΓ, Gq

for all Γ with βpsq ě 0 for all s P S, but F ğsCAD G. Therefore, Ds˚ P S and 

K Q s˚ such that, for some m ă N ´ 1, 

Fpt IpKq ě mu| Xi “ s˚q ă Gpt IpKq ě mu| Yi “ s˚q.

We will construct a game Γ that exhibits strategic complementarity such that 

σ P EpΓ, Gq but σ R EpΓ, Fq. Using the same idea as before, let σ be a strategy such that 

P pσq “ K N P pσq “ SzK. 

38 We specify a game Γ for which σ constitutes an equilibrium under G.

hpA´iq “ 1A´iěm

αpθq “ ´ 1

βpθ, s q

$’’’’’’’&’’’’’’’%

“ 0 if s R K

“ 1

E

„

1A´iěm

ˇˇˇˇs˚; G

ȷ if s P K, s “ s˚

ě 1

E

„

1A´iěm

ˇˇˇˇs; G

ȷ if s P K, s ‰ s˚

It is straightforward to verify that σ P EpΓ, Gqz EpΓ, Fq, a contradiction. 

## A.6. Proof of Proposition 2 

Proof. Using a similar reasoning as in Theorem 1, we can see that if βpsq ď 0 for all s P S, then for strategy profile σ, the inequalities in Equation (4) would be reversed, i.e., For βpsq ď 0, 

ErdpA´i, s q| s, σ ; Fs ´ ErdpA´i, s q| s, σ ; Gs ď 0 if s P P pσqě 0 if s P N P pσq

Therefore, if σ P EpF, Γq, then (IC:P) continues to hold for all s P P pσq under G

and (IC:NP) holds for all s P N P pσq under G. Therefore, σ P EpΓ, Gq.Suppose that EpΓ, Gq Ě EpΓ, Fq for all games Γ with βpsq ď 0 for all s P S, but 

F ńCAD G. Using Lemma 1 again, we know that Ds˚ and K Q s˚ such that, 

FpXj P K|Xi “ s˚q ă GpXj P K|Xi “ s˚q.

Now, we define a σ with P pσq “ K, and a game Γ as follows: 

αpsq “

#

1 if s P K

´1 if s R KhpA´iq “ A´i

βpsq

$’’’’’’’&’’’’’’’%

“ 0 if s R K

“ ´1

E

„

A´i

ˇˇˇˇs˚; F

ȷ if s P K and s “ s˚

ě ´1

E

„

A´i

ˇˇˇˇs; F

ȷ if s P K and s ‰ s˚.

It is straightforward to verify that σ P EpΓ, Fq, but σ R EpΓ, Gq, a contradiction. 39 This proves the first part of the proposition (CAD equivalence). The second part (sCAD equivalence) makes a the same modification to the reasoning in The-orem 3, and hence omitted. 

## A.7. Proof of Proposition 3 

Proof. Following Meyer (1990), we define an elementary transformation on iden-tical intervals (ETI) as follows: Given any s ă s1, we increase the probabilities of 

ps, s q and ps1, s 1q by some α ą 0, while the probabilities of ps1, s q and ps, s 1q are decreased by α each. Proposition 1 of Meyer (1990) says that F ěCAD G if and only if F can be obtained by a finite sequence of ETIs starting from G. We now establish that any ETI increases the expected revenue. To this end, fix s ă s1 and consider an ETI involving s and s1 to construct pG from G.Notice that the price of the object is s whenever the valuations are ps, s q, ps, s 1q

or ps1, s q. Therefore, 

Rp pGq ´ RpGq “ αps1 ` sq ´ 2αpsq “ αps1 ´ sq ą 0.

Hence, RpFq ě RpGq with the inequality being strict whenever F ‰ G.40 B. Online Appendix 

## B.1. Non-exchangeable signal distributions 

The Game Γ and Information Structure F

There are N players, indexed by i or j ‰ i. They simultaneously and indepen-dently choose whether to act ( ai “ 1) or not ( ai “ 0). Each player i’s payoff depends on the weighted aggregate action by others. That is, D⃗λ P RN 

> `

such that 

A´i “ ÿ

> j‰i

λj aj .

Rest of the setup remains the same as in the main model. Let Fisp¨q P ∆pSN ´1q

denote the conditional distribution of player i over other players’ types, given that a player i has type s. Unlike the main text, F need not be exchangeable, this conditional distribution is indexed with the player identity. For any pair of agents i and j, and any T Ă S, we define 

FispXj P T q :“ P rob pXj P T |Xi “ sq.

Suppose that ⃗s “ p s 1, s 2, . . . s N q P SN is the realized type profile. A player i

with type Xi “ s get a payoff of upai “ 1, A´i, s q if she acts and upai “ 0, A´i, s q

if she does not act. The net payoff from taking action 

dpA´i, s q :“ upai “ 1, A´i, s q ´ upai “ 0, A´i, s q “ αpsq ` βpsqhpA´iq,

where hp¨q is increasing. 

Definition 9: The game Γ exhibits strategic complementarity if βp¨q ě 0

and strategic substitutability if βp¨q ď 0 for all s P S. The game is said to be 

affine if hp¨q is affine. 

Definition 10 (Concentration along a Diagonal ): We say that F has a “higher concentration along a diagonal” than G, or F is CAD higher than G,denoted by F ěCAD G, if, 1. F and G have the same marginal distributions. And, 2. For all i, j P N, s P S, and any pair of agents i, j 

(a) FispXj “ sq ě GispXj “ sq, and (b) FispXj “ s1q ď GispXj “ s1q whenever s1 ‰ s.

If X „ F and Y „ G with F ěCAD G, we say X ěCAD Y, i.e., we use X ěCAD Y

and F ěCAD G interchangeably. 

Lemma 3: Let X and Y be two SN -valued random variables with distributions 

F and G respectively. Moreover, F and G have identical marginals. Then, the 

41 following are equivalent. 1. F ěCAD G.2. For all s P S and K Ď S such that s P K, and ⃗ λ P RN 

> `

,

E

«ÿ

> j‰i

λj 1Xj PK

ˇˇˇˇXi “ s

ff 

ě E

«ÿ

> j‰i

λj 1Yj PK

ˇˇˇˇYi “ s

ff 

.

Proof of Lemma 3. Fix i such that Xi “ s. Then, 

F ěCAD G ðñ FispXj P K

ˇˇˇˇXi “ sq ě FispYj P K

ˇˇˇˇYi “ sq @j, s, K Q s, 

ðñ E

„

λj 1Xj PK

ˇˇˇˇXi “ s

ȷ

ě E

„

λj 1Yj PK

ˇˇˇˇYi “ s

ȷ

for any λj P R`, @s, K Q s. 

ùñ E

«ÿ

> j‰i

λj 1Xj PK

ˇˇˇˇXi “ s

ff 

ě E

«ÿ

> j‰i

λj 1Yj PK

ˇˇˇˇYi “ s

ff 

for any λj P R`, @s, K Q s. 

For the reverse, suppose that F ńCAD G. Therefore, Di, j, s, K Q s, such that 

FispXj P Kq ă GispXj P Kq.

Then, let ⃗ λ be defined by λk “ 1kPt i,j u. Then, 

E

«ÿ

> j‰i

λj 1Xj PK

ˇˇˇˇXi “ s

ff 

ă E

«ÿ

> j‰i

λj 1Yj PK

ˇˇˇˇYi “ s

ff 

contradicting the hypothesis. 

Theorem 5: Let F and G be two joint distributions over SN and hp¨q is affine and increasing. The following are equivalent. 1. F ěCAD G.2. EpΓ, Fq Ě EpΓ, Gq for all Γ that exhibits strategic complementarity. 3. EpΓ, Fq Ď EpΓ, Gq for all Γ that exhibits strategic substitutability. Proof of Theorem 5. The proof of p1q ùñ p2q, p3q is identical to the proof of Theorem 1 with the only difference being that the conditional distributions now have to be indexed by the player identity i. Therefore, we omit it. Now, we show p2q ùñ p1q and p3q ùñ p1q. Suppose that EpΓ, Fq Ě EpΓ, Gq

for all Γ with βpsq ě 0 for all s P S, but F ńCAD G. Therefore, Di, j a s P S,and K Ď S with s P K, such that, FispXj P Kq ă GispXj P Kq. Let ⃗ λ be defined by λk “ 1kPt i,j u. Then, this game is essentially a 2 ´player symmetric game. Therefore, replicating the construction from the proof of Theorem 1 with N “ 2and using Lemma 3, we obtain the desired equivalence. 42 B.2. Relationship of CAD with other orders 

Below, we discuss how our proposed orders—strong CAD, CAD, and contour CAD—relate to well-known orders like the supermodular order or the concor-dance order. In two dimensions, the supermodular and the concordance orders are equivalent (see Meyer and Strulovici, 2012). For more than two dimen-sions, the supermodular order is strictly stronger than the concordance order, i.e., F ěsm G ùñ F ěconc G, where ěsm and ěconc denote the supermodular and the concordance orders respectively. 

Proposition 4: Suppose F and G are joint distributions over SN -valued, ex-changeable random variables. 1. For N “ 2, F ěcCAD G ùñ F ěsm G. But D F, G such that F ěsm G but 

F ğcCAD G.2. For N ą 2, ěCAD and ěsm are not nested. Also, ěcCAD and ěsm are not nested. Proof of Proposition 4. Proposition 1 established that F ěCAD G ùñ F ěcCAD 

G. We first prove part p1q. Suppose that F ěcCAD G. Consider any s, s 1 P S. Let 

s1 ě s wlog. Then, 

FpX1 ď s, X2 ď s1q “ ÿ

> ˆsďs

FˆspX2 ď s1qFpX1 “ ˆsqě ÿ

> ˆsďs

GˆspX2 ď s1qGpX1 “ ˆsq“ GpX1 ď s, X2 ď s1q

where the inequality is due to the fact that F ěcCAD G and the marginal distri-butions of F and G coincide. Similarly, 

FpX1 ě s, X2 ě s1q “ ÿ

> ˆsěs1

FˆspX1 ě sqFpX2 “ ˆsqě ÿ

> ˆsěs1

GˆspX1 ě sqGpX2 “ ˆsq“ GpX1 ě s, X2 ě s1q

where, again, the inequality is due to the fact that F ěcCAD G and the marginal distributions of F and G coincide. Therefore, F ěsm G, and hence, F ěconc G.Next, we prove part (2) by providing an example. 17 Let S “ t 0, 1u and N “ 3. Consider S3-valued random variable ⃗ X :“ p X1, X2, X3q. Consider two different joint distributions over ⃗ X denoted by F and G as described in Table 1 below. Let us first show that F ěCAD G but F ğsm G. Notice that, for any i, j such that i ‰ j and a P t 0, 1u, FpXi “ a|Xj “ aq “ 13 ą 14 “ GpXi “ a|Xj “ aq.

> 17 This example is due to Margaret Meyer and Bruno Strulovici, and can be found here.

43 s1 s2 s3 F G

0 0 0 13 00 0 1 0 14

0 1 0 0 14

1 0 0 0 14

0 1 1 16 01 0 1 16 01 1 0 16 01 1 1 1614

Table 1: F ěCAD G but F and G not ěsm -ranked Therefore, F ěCAD G. Consider the supermodular function f psq “ 1s“p 1,1,1q.Then, EF rf p⃗Xqss ă EG rf p⃗Xqs . Also, consider gpxq “ 1x“p 0,0,0q. Then, EF rgp⃗Xqs ą 

EG rgp⃗Xqs . Therefore, F ğsm G.To show that the orders are not nested, however, we also need to show that there are exchangeable distributions F, G such that F ěsm G but F ńCAD G for more than 2 dimensions. The example below, in the spirit of the one in Figure 1, establishes this. Let ⃗ X be a t1, 2, 3u3´valued random variable. Suppose that G is the joint distribution of ⃗ X with Xi’s being independent and uniformly distributed. Now, consider the following operations for some small α ą 0 (so that probabilities stay non-negative): 

• If the realization is p2, 2, 2q, reduce the mass by 6 α.

• For any realization that is a permutation of p2, 1, 2q, increase the mass by 2α.

• For any realization that is a permutation of p2, 2, 3q, increase the mass by 2α.

• For any realization that is a permutation of p1, 2, 3q, reduce the mass by α.It is easy to check that FpX2 “ 2|X1 “ 2q ă GpX2 “ 2|X1 “ 2q. Therefore, 

F ńCAD G. In fact, F ğcCAD G too since 

FpX2 P t 1, 2u| X1 “ 2q ă GpX2 P t 1, 2u| X1 “ 2q.

Finally, to check that F ěsm G necessitates proving that F can be obtained from G

through “elementary transformations” as defined in Meyer and Strulovici (2015). This is indeed the case, however, we omit the details here. 44 B.3. Common learning and similarity of information 

Awaya and Krishna (2025) show how more correlation in players’ signals impedes common learning thereby hindering coordination. We briefly discuss their leading example here to illustrate the key contrast. There is a binary state of the world θ P t G, B u. There are two players, and two periods. In each period, each agent receives some t0, 1u-valued signal about the state. Signal realization of 1 is conclusive of state G while 0 can arise in both states. Signals are independent across periods but can be correlated across players within a given period. At the end of period 2, they decide simultaneously and privately whether to invest at a cost c or not. When θ “ B, investment yields no returns, while in state G, an investment yields a return of 1 if the other player invests. Thus, both players would like to coordinate to invest in state G and not invest in state B.They point out that when the signals are conditionally independent across players, there are cost parameters and signal structures such that investing upon receiving at least one 1 in two periods is an equilibrium. Subsequently, for some such cost and signal structures, they do the analogous exercise as ours: they keep the marginal distribution unchanged and make the signals more similar (in the CAD or PQD order) within a period. Yet, the unique equilibrium is that no player invests regardless of the number of 1s they receive! The source of this finding is that increasing similarity within a period does not imply that the vector of signals across the two periods becomes more similar. In particular, it is possible that when a player receives exactly one 1 and one 0, he assigns a higher probability to the other agent receiving both zeroes with signals being more similar within a period. That is, we can view the two players’ signals across two periods as a tp 0, 0q, p0, 1q, p1, 0q, p1, 1qu 2-valued random variable. Then, 

P rob pX2 P tp 0, 1q, p1, 0q, p1, 1qu| X1 “ p 0, 1qq may decrease with signals being more similar within a period. Here, Xi is player i’s signal in two periods. 

## B.4. Information similarity and rationalizability 

In this section, we explore the effect of increases in similarity in the CAD orders on the set of rationalizable actions (rather than the set of equilibria). Below, we consider the a private-value example, and show that any action that is rationaliz-able for a type continues to be rationalizable if information becomes more similar in the sense of CAD. Let S be the set of types and G be the joint distribution of types. A map-ping x : S Ñ R describes the payoff parameter of interest to a player. Player i

knows her own payoff parameter xpsiq but may not know the other player’s payoff parameter xpsj q.

GspT q :“ P rob pXj P T |Xi “ sq

45 describes player i of type s’s belief about the other player’s type. Each player decide whether or not to invest, and payoffs are as follows. Invest Don’t Invest xps1q, x ps2q xps1q ´ 1, 0Don’t 0, x ps2q ´ 1 0, 0

Proposition 5: If F ěCAD G, then any action ai that is rationalizable for a type 

si of player i under G remains rationalizable under F.Proof. Consider ϕi : S Ñ R. Given the information structure G, an event E “

E1 ˆ E2 for Ei Ď S is said to be pϕ1, ϕ 2q´ believed if each player i of type si

believes that the probability of the event E is at least ϕipsiq. Formally, define 

Bϕi 

> i

pE|Gq :“ tp s1, s 2q| si P Ei, Gsi pEj q ě ϕipsiqu .

Then, the set of states where the event E is pϕ1, ϕ 2q´ believed is 

Bϕ1,ϕ 2 

> ˚

pE|Gq “ Bϕ1 

> 1

pE|Gq č Bϕ2 

> 2

pE|Gq

There is a common pϕ1, ϕ 2q´ belief of the event E if it is pϕ1, ϕ 2q´ believed that it is pϕ1, ϕ 2q´ believed, and so on. The set of states where the event E is common 

pϕ1, ϕ 2q´ believed is 

Cϕ1,ϕ 2 pE|Gq :“ č

> ně1

rBϕ1,ϕ 2 

> ˚

snpE|Gq

It follows from Proposition 1 in Morris et al. (2016) that under the information structure G, for any type si of player i, the action invest is rationalizable if si P

C1´x, 1´xi pT |Gq and the action not invest is rationalizable if si P Cx,x i pT |Gq. The argument is as follows. Let R1 

> i

pGq be the set of types such that investment is level 1 rationalizable for player i. If xpsiq ă 0, player i gets a strictly higher payoff from not investing regardless of what the opponent does. Note that Gsi pSq ě 1 ´ xpsiq iff xpsiq ě 0(since player i assigns probability 1 to event S). Therefore, 

R1 

> i

pGq “ B1´xi pS|Gq.

The action invest is rational for both players when S2 is p1 ´ x, 1 ´ xq´ believed. We write this set of types as B1´x, 1´x 

> ˚

pS2|Gq “ B1´x, 1´x 

> ˚

pS2|Gq1 ˆB1´x, 1´x 

> ˚

pS2|Gq2.Let R2 

> i

pGq be the set of types for which investment is level 2 rationalizable. This is the set of types si P B1´x, 1´x 

> ˚

pS2|Gqi such that Gsi pB1´x, 1´x 

> ˚

pS2|Gqj q ě 1 ´ xpsiq.Since player j will not invest if sj R B1´x, 1´x 

> ˚

pS2|Gqj , the payoff from invest is at 46 most xpsiq ´ p 1 ´ Gsi pB1´x, 1´x 

> ˚

pS2|Gqj qq . Therefore, if 

Gsi pB1´x, 1´x 

> ˚

pS2|Gqj q ă 1 ´ xpsiq,

player i of type si strictly prefers not invest over invest. Therefore, 

R2 

> i

pGq “ B1´xi pB1´x, 1´x 

> ˚

pS2|Gqq .

Iterating this argument, we get 

Rk`1 

> i

pGq “ B1´xi pr B1´x, 1´x 

> ˚

skpS2|Gqq .

The action invest is rationalizable for both players if it is k´th level rationalizable for all k. In other words, exactly when S2 is common p1 ´ x, 1 ´ xq´ believed: 

R8pGq “ C1´x, 1´xpS2|Gq.

By a symmetric argument, action not invest is rationalizable exactly when S2 is common px, x q´ believed. Note that for any information structure G, rB1´x, 1´x 

> ˚

skpS2|Gq1 “ r B1´x, 1´x 

> ˚

skpS2|Gq2

for any k “ 1, 2, . . . 8. By definition, F ěCAD G implies for any si P r B1´x, 1´x 

> ˚

skpS2|Gqi,

Fsi pr B1´x, 1´x 

> ˚

skpS2|Gqj q ě Gsi pr B1´x, 1´x 

> ˚

skpS2|Gqj q

Therefore, 

B1´x, 1´x 

> ˚

pS2|Gq “ B1´x, 1´x 

> ˚

pS2|Fq

B1´xi pB1´x, 1´x 

> ˚

pS2|Gqq Ď B1´xi pB1´x, 1´x 

> ˚

pS2|Fqq 

. . . B1´xi pr B1´x, 1´x 

> ˚

skpS2|Gqq Ď B1´xi pr B1´x, 1´x 

> ˚

skpS2|Fqq ùñ č

> kě1

rB1´x, 1´x 

> ˚

skpS2|Gq Ď č

> kě1

rB1´x, 1´x 

> ˚

skpS2|Fq

or, C1´x, 1´xpS2|Gq Ď C1´x, 1´xpS2|Fq

or, R8pGq Ď R8pFq.

This means if the action invest is rationalizable for a player i of type si under in-formation structure G, then it remains rationalizable under F ěCAD G. Analogous arguments can be made for the action “not invest” as well. 

## B.5. Two-player Bank Run Example 

Two agents each decide whether to stay (S) or run (R) on a bank. The payoff from running is 0. The payoff from staying is θ if the other player stays, and θ ´ 1 if the other runs, where θ is the underlying unknown fundamental state θ P t 32 , 12 , ´12 u.47 The payoff matrix is as follows. Stay Run Stay θ, θ θ ´ 1, 0Run 0, θ ´ 1 0, 0Note that if θ “ 32 then regardless of the other player’s action, a player gets a higher payoff from staying. On the other hand, if θ “ ´ 12 then regardless of the other player’s action, a player gets a higher payoff from running. In the introduction, we show that in this example, increasing correlation of signals by introducing positive α (see Figure 1) can eliminate the maximal run equilibrium. Below, we assume a parametric information structure to illustrate how the set of equilibria changes as we increase α.To ensure that there is a range of α for which the minimal run equilibrium exists but the maximal run equilibrium does not exists, we need to introduce some asymmetry either in the prior or the information structure. We do this for the prior while keep the information structure symmetric. The state θ is drawn from the prior: P pθ “ ´ 12 q “ ϵ, P pθ “ 32 q “ 2ϵ, and P pθ “ 12 q “ 1 ´ 3ϵ. Each player i

sees a signal si P t 32 , 12 , ´12 u drawn from a marginal distribution P psi “ θ|θq “ p

and P psi “ θ1|θq “ 1´p 

> 2

for θ1 ‰ θ. Consider the following change in the signal structure, which makes the two signals more correlated. Suppose that the joint distribution of signals for state θ “ 12 is as follows. marg 1´p 

> 2

p 1´p 

> 2

1 

> 32

p1´p 

> 2

q2 ´ α pp1´p 

> 2

q ` α p1´p 

> 2

q2 1´p 

> 212

pp1´p 

> 2

q ` α p2 ´ 2α pp1´p 

> 2

q ` α p

´12 p1´p 

> 2

q2 pp1´p 

> 2

q ` α p1´p 

> 2

q2 ´ α 1´p

> 2

s1{s2 ´121232 marg Note that when the state is θ “ 12 , the two signals are more likely to be high together or low together. Therefore, this change also means the signals are more interdependent according to supermodular or PQD order. α is a non-negative constant. If α “ 0, then the signals are conditionally independent. A higher α

makes the signals more interdependent. For simplicity, let us assume the joint distributions for state θ “ 32 and θ “ ´ 12 are conditionally independent. We assume that p ą 3´3ϵ 

> 3´ϵ

, which ensures that when players see extreme signals, the updated beliefs are sufficiently high such that R is strictly dominated for an agent with signal si “ 32 and S is strictly dominated for an agent with signal 

si “ ´ 12 .18 The agent who receives a signal si “ 12 may or may not stay depending on her belief about the other player. Given an info structure pϵ, p, α q, there may exist two symmetric BNE: 1. Good Eqm: S if si “ 32 , 12 and R if si “ ´ 12 and                              

> 18 An agent iwith signal sibelieves that Ppθ“32|si“32q ą Ppθ“ ´ 12|si“ ´ 12q “
> pϵ pϵ `1´p
> 2p1´ϵqą34when pą3´3ϵ
> 3´ϵ, which ensures the above dominated strategies.

48 α˚ α˚˚ 

eG, e B eG

Figure 4: Correlation and Equilibrium 2. Bad Eqm: S if si “ 32 and R if si “ 12 , ´12

Let e be a symmetric BNE, eG be the good eqm and eB be the bad eqm, and E

be the set of symmetric BNE. For the bad equilibrium eB to exist, it must be that the agent who sees signal 12

wants to run if he believes that the other player plays the eB strategy. Note that for any state θ, if an agent believes that the other player will stay with probability 

q, then her expected payoff from staying is θq `p θ´1qp 1´qq “ θ`q ´1. Therefore, 

eB exists if 

ÿ

> θ

P

ˆ

θ|si “ 12

˙ ˆ 

θ ` P

ˆ

sj P t 32u| si “ 12, θ 

˙

´ 1

˙

ď 0

E

„

θ|si “ 12

ȷ

` ÿ

> θ

P

ˆ

θ|si “ 12

˙

P

ˆ

sj P t 32u| si “ 12, θ 

˙

´ 1 ď 0.

Note that the LHS increases in α. There exists α˚ such that eB is an equilibrium iff α ď α˚.Similarly, for eG to exist, it must be that the agent who sees signal 12 wants to stay if he believes that the other player plays the eG strategy. One can show that there exists α˚˚ ą α˚ such that both the good and the bad equilibria eB , e G exists for α ď α˚ and only the good equilibrium eG exists for α P r α˚, α ˚˚ s.19 

Consider a policymaker who does not want the players to run on the bank. Let 

Rpeq be the expected number of players who run in equilibrium e.Suppose that the policymaker anticipates that the player will play the worst equilibrium. Let us define the maximal expected run as 

R :“ max  

> ePE

Rpeq.

Note that the maximal expected run only depends on the marginal distribution of signal and not the joint distribution. 20 Therefore, the impact of α on maximal 

> 19

eG exists if E “θ|si “ 12

‰ ` ř 

> θ

P `θ|si “ 12

˘ P `sj P t 32 , 12 u| si “ 12 , θ ˘ ´ 1 ě 0. Since the LHS decreases in α, there is α˚˚ such that eG exists for α ď α˚˚ . One can check that α˚ “ ´ “E “θ|si “ 12

‰ ` P `sj “ 32 |si “ 12

˘ ´ 1‰ pP rθ“ 12 |si“ 12 s and α˚˚ “

“E “θ|si “ 12

‰ ´ P `sj “ ´ 12 |si “ 12

˘‰ pP rθ“ 12 |si“ 12 s where the probabilities are based on the joint distribution before the change (conditionally independent). Finally, because apriori, θ is more likely to be 32 than ´ 12 , E “θ|si “ 12

‰ ą 12 and P `sj “ 32 |si “ 12

˘ ą P `sj “ ´ 12 |si “ 12

˘, which ensures α˚˚ ą α˚.

> 20

RpeGq “ 2 ˆ P `si “ ´ 12 , s j “ ´ 12

˘ ` 2 ˆ 1 ˆ P `si “ ´ 12 , s j ‰ ´ 12

˘ “ 2 ˆ P `si “ ´ 12

˘ .

49 expected run is only through the equilibrium. Recall that the bad equilibrium 

eB does not exist when α becomes sufficiently high ( α ą α˚). This means the maximal expected run R falls when α crosses the threshold α˚. Thus, surprisingly, in a canonical model, increasing correlation of information decreases the maximal expected number of people that would run on the bank!             

> Similarly, RpeBq “ 2ˆP`siP t´ 12,12u˘.

50